The Project Gutenberg eBook ofThe Will to Power: An Attempted Transvaluation of All Values. Book III and IVThis ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
atwww.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.Title: The Will to Power: An Attempted Transvaluation of All Values. Book III and IVAuthor: Friedrich Wilhelm NietzscheEditor: Oscar LevyTranslator: Anthony M. LudoviciRelease date: August 28, 2016 [eBook #52915]Most recently updated: October 23, 2024Language: EnglishCredits: Produced by Marc D'Hooghe Free Literature (back onlinesoon in an extended version, alo linking to free sourcesfor education worldwide ... MOOC's, educationalmaterials,...) (Images generously made available by theInternet Archive.)*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WILL TO POWER: AN ATTEMPTED TRANSVALUATION OF ALL VALUES. BOOK III AND IV ***THE WILL TO POWERAN ATTEMPTEDTRANSVALUATION OF ALL VALUESByFRIEDRICH NIETZSCHETRANSLATED BYANTHONY M. LUDOVICIVOL. IIBOOKS III AND IVThe Complete Works of Friedrich NietzscheThe First Complete and Authorised English TranslationEdited by Dr Oscar LevyVolume SeventeenT.N. FOULIS13 & 15 FREDERICK STREETEDINBURGH: AND LONDON1913CONTENTS OF VOL. II.Third Book. the Principles of a New Valuation.I. The Will to Power in Science—(a)The Method of Investigation3(b)The Starting-Point of Epistemology5(c)The Belief in the "Ego." Subject12(d)Biology of the Instinct of Knowledge. Perspectivity20(e)The Origin of Reason and Logic26(f)Consciousness38(g)Judgment. True—False43(h)Against Causality53(i)The Thing-in-Itself and Appearance62(k)The Metaphysical Need74(l)The Biological Value of Knowledge96(m)Science99II. The Will to Power in Nature—1. The Mechanical Interpretation of the World1092. The Will to Power as Life—(a)The Organic Process123(b)Man1323. Theory of the Will to Power and of Valuations161III. The Will to Power As Exemplified in Society andin the Individual1. Society and the State1832. The Individual214IV. The Will to Power in Art239Fourth Book. Discipline and Breeding.I.The Order of Rank—1. The Doctrine of the Order of Rank2952. The Strong and the Weak2983. The Noble Man3504. The Lords of the Earth3605. The Great Man3666. The Highest Man as Lawgiver of the Future373II. Dionysus388III. Eternal Recurrence422TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE.For the history of the text constituting this volume I would refer
readers to my preface toThe Will to Power,Books I, and II., where
they will also find a brief explanation of the actual title of the
complete work.In the two books before us Nietzsche boldly carries his principle
still further into the various departments of human life, and does not
shrink from showing its application even to science, to art, and to
metaphysics.Throughout Part I. of the Third Book we find him going to great pains
to impress the fact upon us that science is as arbitrary as art in
its mode of procedure, and that the knowledge of the scientist is but
the outcome of his inexorable will to power interpreting facts in the
terms of the self-preservative conditions of the particular order of
human beings to which he belongs. In Aphorisms 515 and 516, which are
typical of almost all the thought expressed in Part I., Nietzsche says
distinctly: "The object is not 'to know,' but to schematise,—to impose
as much regularity and form upon chaos as our practical needs require."Unfamiliarity, constant change, and the inability to reckon with
possibilities, are sources of greatdanger: hence, everythingmustbe explained, assimilated, and rendered capable of calculation, if
Nature is to be mastered and controlled.Schemes for interpreting earthly phenomena must be devised which,
though they do not require to be absolute or irrefutable, must
yet favour the maintenance of the kind of men that devises them.
Interpretation thus becomes all important, and facts sink down to
the rank of raw material which must first be given some shape (some
sense—always anthropocentric) before they can become serviceable.Even the development of reason and logic Nietzsche consistently shows
to be but a spiritual development of the physiological function
of digestion which compels an organism to make things "like" (to
"assimilate") before it can absorb them (Aph. 510). And seeing that he
denies that hunger can be a first motive (Aphs. 651-656), and proceeds
to show that it is the amœba's will to power which makes it extend its
pseudopodia in search of what it can appropriate, and that, once the
appropriated matter is enveloped, it is a process of makingsimilarwhich constitutes the process of absorption, reason itself is by
inference acknowledged to be merely a form of the same fundamental will.An interesting and certainly inevitable outcome of Nietzsche's argument
appears in Aph. 516, where he declares that even our inability to deny
and affirm one and the same thing is not in the least necessary,but
only a sign of inability.The whole argument of Part I. tends to drawscience ever nearer and
nearer to art (except, of course, in those cases in which science
happens to consist merely of an ascertainment of facts), and to prove
that the one like the other is no more than a means of gaining some
foothold upon the slippery soil of a world that is for ever in flux.In the rush and pell-mell of Becoming, some milestones must be fixed
for the purposes of human orientation. In the torrent of evolutionary
changes pillars must be made to stand, to which man can for a space
hold tight and collect his senses. Science, like art, accomplishes this
for us, and it is our will to power which "creates the impression of
Being out of Becoming" (Aph. 517).According to this standpoint, then, consciousness is also but a weapon
in the service of the will to power, and it extends or contracts
according to our needs (Aph. 524). It might disappear altogether (Aph.
523), or, on the other hand, it might increase and make our life more
complicated than it already is. But we should guard against making
it the Absolute behind Becoming, simply because it happens to be the
highest and most recent evolutionary form (Aph. 709). If we had done
this with each newly acquired characteristic, sight itself, which is a
relatively recent development, would also have required to have been
deified.Pantheism, Theism, Unitarianism—in fact all religions in which aconsciousgod is worshipped, are thus aptly classed by Nietzsche
as the result of man's desire to elevate that which is but a new and
wonderful instrument of his will to power, to the chief place in the
imaginary world beyond(eternal soul), and to make it even the deity
itself (God Omniscient).With the question of Truth we find Nietzsche quite as ready to uphold
his thesis as with all other questions. He frankly declares that "the
criterion of truth lies in the enhancement of the feeling of power"
(Aph. 534), and thus stands in diametrical opposition to Spencer, who
makes constraint or inability the criterion of truth. (SeePrinciples
of Psychology,new edition, chapter ix.... "the unconceivableness of
its negation is the ultimate test of the truth of a proposition.")However paradoxical Nietzsche's view may seem, we shall find that
it is actually substantiated by experience; for the activity of our
senses certainly convinces us more or less according to the degree to
which it is provoked. Thus, if we walked for long round a completely
dark room, and everything yielded, however slightly, to our touch, we
should remain quite unconvinced that we were in a room at all, more
particularly if—to suppose a still more impossible case—the floor
yielded too. What provokes great activity in the bulbs of our fingers,
then, likewise generates the sensation of truth.From this Nietzsche proceeds to argue that what provokes the strongest
sentiments in ourselves is also true to us, and, from the standpoint of
thought, "that which gives thought the greatest sensation of strength"
(Aph. 533).The provocation of intense emotion, and therefore the provocation
of that state in which the body is above the normal in power, thus
becomesthe index to truth; and it is a very remarkable thing that two
prominent English thinkers should, at the very end of their careers,
have practically admitted this, despite the fact that all their
philosophical productions had been based upon a completely different
belief. I refer, of course, to Spencer and Buckle, who both upheld the
view that in a system of thought the emotional factor is of the highest
importance.It follows from all this, that lies and false doctrines may quite
conceivably prove to be even more preservative to species than truth
itself, and although this is a view we have already encountered in the
opening aphorisms ofBeyond Good and Evil,in Aph, 538 this volume
we find it further elucidated by Nietzsche's useful demonstration
of the fact that "the easier way of thinking always triumphs over
the more difficult way"; and that logic, inasmuch as it facilitated
classification and orderly thought, ultimately "got to act like truths."Before leaving Part I., with which it would be impossible to deal in
full, a word or two ought to be said in regard to Nietzsche's views
concerning the belief in "cause and effect." In theGenealogy of
Morals(1st Essay, Aph. 13), we have already read a forecast of our
author's more elaborate opinions on this question, and the aphorism
in question might be read with advantage in conjunction with the
discussion on the subject found in this book (Aphs. 545-555).The whole of Nietzsche's criticism, however, resolves itself into
this, that the doctrine of causalitybegins with an unnecessary
duplication of all that happens. Language, and its origin among a
people uneducated in thoughts and concepts, is at the root of this
scientific superstition, and Nietzsche traces its evolution from the
primeval and savage desire always to find a "doer" behind every deed:
to find some one who is responsible and who, being known, thus modifies
the unfamiliarity of the deed which requires explaining. "The so-called
instinct of causality [of which Kant speaks with so much assurance] is
nothing more than the fear of the unfamiliar."In Aph. 585 (A), we have a very coherent and therefore valuable
exposition of much that may still seem obscure in Nietzsche's
standpoint, and we might almost regard this aphorism as the key to
the epistemology of the Will to Power. When we find the "will to
truth" defined merely as "the longing for a stable world," we are in
possession of the very leitmotiv of Nietzsche's thought throughout Part
I., and most of what follows is clearly but an elaboration of this
thought.In Part II. Nietzsche reveals himself as utterly opposed to all
mechanistic and materialistic interpretations of the Universe. He
exalts the spirit and repudiates the idea that mere pressure from
without—naked environment—is to be held responsible (and often
guilty!) for all that materialistic science would lay at its door.
Darwin again comes in for a good deal of sharp criticism; and, to those
who are familiar with the nature of Nietzsche's disagreement with this
naturalist, such aphorisms as Nos. 643, 647, 649, 651, 684, 685,will
be of special interest. There is one question of great moment, which
all Nietzsche's perfectly sincere and profoundly serious deprecation
of the Darwinian standpoint ought to bring home to all Englishmen who
have perhaps too eagerly endorsed the conclusions of their own British
school of organic evolution, and that is, to what extent were Malthus,
and afterwards his disciple Darwin, perhaps influenced in their
analysis of nature by preconceived notions drawn from the state of
high pressure which prevailed in the thickly-populated and industrial
country in which they both lived?It is difficult to defend Darwin from the fundamental attack which
Nietzsche directs at the very root of his teaching, and which turns
upon the question of the motive of all Life's struggle. To assume
that the motive is always a "struggle for existence" presupposes the
constant presence of two conditions—want and over-population,—an
assumption which is absolutely non-proven, and it likewise lends a
peculiarly ignoble and cowardly colouring to the whole of organic life,
which not only remains unsubstantiated in fact, but which the struggle
for power completely escapes. In Part III., which, throughout, is
pretty plain sailing, Aphorism 786 contains perhaps the most important
statements. Here morality is shown to be merely an instrument, but this
time it is the instrument of the gregarious will to power. In the last
paragraph of this aphorism Nietzsche shows himself quite antagonistic
to Determinism, because of its intimate relation to, and its origin in,
a mechanistic interpretation of the Universe.But we should always
remember that, inasmuch as Nietzsche would distribute beliefs, just as
others distribute bounties—that is to say, according to the needs of
those whom he has in view, we must never take for granted that a belief
which he deprecates for one class of man ought necessarily, according
to him, to be denied another class.Hard as it undoubtedly is to bear this in mind, we should remember that
his appeal is almost without interruption made to higher men, and that
doctrines and creeds which he condemns for them he would necessarily
exalt in the case of people who were differently situated and otherwise
constituted. Christianity is a case in point (seeWill to Power,vol.
i. Aph. 132).We now come to Part IV., which is possibly the most important part of
all, seeing that it treats of those questions which may be regarded as
Nietzsche's most constant concern from the time when he wrote his first
book.The world as we now see and know it, with all that it contains which is
beautiful, indifferent, or ugly, from a human standpoint, is, according
to Nietzsche, the creation of our own valuing minds. Perhaps only a few
people have had a hand in shaping this world of values. Maybe their
number could be counted on the fingers of two hands; but still, what
Nietzsche insists upon is, that it is human in its origin. Our whole
outlook, everything that gives us joy or pain, must at one time or
other have been valued for us, and in persisting in these valuations
we, as the acclimatised herd, are indebted to our artists, to our
higher men, to all those inhistory, who at some time or other have
dared to stand up and to declare emphatically thatthiswas ugly and
thatthatwas beautiful, and to fight, and if necessary to die, for
their opinion.Religion, morality, and philosophy, while they all aim at so-called
universal Truth, tend to depreciate the value of life in the eyes of
exceptional men. Though they establish the "beautiful" for the general
stock, and in that way enhance the value of life for that stock,
they contradict higher men's values, and, by so doing, destroy their
innocent faith in the world. For the problem here is not, what value is
true?—but, what value is most conducive to the highest form of human
life on earth?Nietzsche would fain throw all the burden of valuing upon the Dionysian
artist him who speaks about this world out of the love and plenitude
of power that is in his own breast, him who, from the very health that
is within him, cannot look out upon life without transfiguring it,
hallowing it, blessing it, and making it appear better, bigger, and
more beautiful. And, in this view, Nietzsche is quite consistent; for,
if we must accept his conclusion that our values are determined for us
by our higher men, then it becomes of the highest importance that these
valuers should be so constituted that their values may be a boon and
not a bane to the rest of humanity.Alas! only too often, and especially in the nineteenth century, have
men who lacked this Dionysian spirit stood up and valued the world; and
it is against these that Nietzsche protests. Itis the bad air they
have spread which he would fain dispel.An to what art means to the artist himself, apart from its actual
effect on the world, Nietzsche would say that it is a manner of
discharging his will to power. The artist tries to stamp his opinion
of what is desirable, and of what is beautiful or ugly, upon his
contemporaries and the future; it is in this valuing that his impulse
to prevail finds its highest expression. Hence the instinctive economy
of artists in sex matters—that is to say, in precisely that quarter
whither other men go when their impulse to prevail urges them to
action. Nietzsche did not of course deny the sensual nature of artists
(Aph. 815); all he wished to make plain was this, that an artist who
was not moderate,in eroticis,while engaged upon his task, was open
to the strongest suspicion.In the Fourth Book Nietzsche is really at his very best. Here, while
discussing questions such as "The Order of Rank," he is so thoroughly
in his exclusive sphere, that practically every line, even if it were
isolated and taken bodily from the context, would bear the unmistakable
character of its author. The thought expressed in Aphorism 871 reveals
a standpoint as new as it is necessary. So used have we become to the
practice of writing and legislating for a mass, that we have forgotten
the rule that prevails even in our own navy—that the speed of a fleet
is measured by its slowest vessel.On the same principle, seeing that all our philosophies and moralities
have hitherto been directedat a mass and at a mob, we find that their
elevation must of necessity be decided by the lowest of mankind. Thus
all passions are banned, because base men do not know how to enlist
them in their service. Men who are masters of themselves and of others,
men who understand the management and privilege of passion, become the
most despised of creatures in such systems of thought, because they are
confounded with the vicious and licentious; and the speed of mankind's
elevation thus gets to be determined by humanity's slowest vessels.Aphorisms 881, 882, 886 fully elucidate the above considerations, while
in 912, 916, 943, and 951 we have plans of a constructive teaching
which the remainder of Part I. elaborates.And now, following Nietzsche carefully through Part II. (Dionysus),
what is the inevitable conclusion of all we have read? This analysis
of the world's collective values and their ascription to a certain
"will to power" may now seem to many but an exhaustive attempt at a new
system of nomenclature, and little else. As a matter or fact it is very
much more than this. By mean? of it Nietzsche wishes to show mankind
how much has lain, and how much still lies, in man's power By laying
his finger on everything and declaring to man that it was human will
that created it. Nietzsche wished to give man the courage of this will,
and a clean conscience in exercising it. For it was precisely this very
will to power which had been most hated and most maligned by everybody
up to Nietzsche's time.Long enough, prompted by the fear of attributing any one of his
happiest thoughts to this hated fundamental will, had man ascribed
all his valuations and all his most sublime inspirations to something
outside himself,—whether this something were a God, a principle, or
the concept Truth. But Nietzsche's desire was to show man how human,
all too human, have been the values that have appeared heretofore;
he wished to prove, that to the rare sculptors of values, the world,
despite its past, is still an open field of yielding clay, and in
pointing to what the will to power has done until now, Nietzsche
suggests to these coming sculptors what might still be done, provided
they fear nothing, and have that innocence and that profound faith in
the fundamental will which others hitherto have had in God, Natural
Laws, Truth, and other euphemistic fictions.The doctrine of Eternal Recurrence, to which Nietzsche attached so much
importance that it may be regarded almost as the inspiration which led
to his great work,Thus Spake Zarathustra,ought to be understood
in the light of a purely disciplinary and chastening creed. In one of
his posthumous works we find Nietzsche saying: "The question which
thou shalt have to answer before every deed that thou doest;—is this
such a deed as I am prepared to perform an incalculable number of
times,—is the best ballast." Thus it is obvious that, feeling the need
of something in his teaching which would replace the metaphysics of
former beliefs, he applied the doctrine of Eternal Recurrence to this
end. Seeing, however,that even among Nietzscheans themselves there
is considerable doubt concerning the actual value of the doctrine as
a ruling belief, it does not seem necessary to enter here into the
scientific justification which he claims for it. Suffice it to say
that, as knowledge stands at present, the statement that the world will
recur eternally in small things as in great, is still a somewhat daring
conjecture—a conjecture, however, which would have been entirely
warrantable if its disciplinary value had been commensurate with its
daring.ANTHONY M. LUDOVICI.THIRD BOOK.THE PRINCIPLES OF A NEW VALUATION.I.THE WILL TO POWER IN SCIENCE.(a)The Method of Investigation.466.The distinguishing feature of our nineteenth century is not the triumph
ofscience,but the triumph of the scientificmethodover science.467.The history of scientific methodswas regarded by Auguste Comte
almost as philosophy itself.468.The greatMethodologists:Aristotle, Bacon, Descartes, Auguste Comte.469.The most valuable knowledge is always discovered last: but the most
valuable knowledge consists ofmethods.All methods, all the hypotheses on which the science of our day
depends, were treated with the profoundest contempt for centuries:
on their account a man used to be banished from the society ofrespectablepeople—he was held to be an "enemy of God," a reviler
of the highest ideal, a madman.We had the wholepathosof mankind against us,—our notion of what
"truth" ought to be, of what the service of truth ought to be, our
objectivity, our method, our calm, cautious and distrustful manner were
altogetherdespicable....At bottom, that which has kept men back
most, is an æsthetic taste: they believed in the picturesque effect of
truth; what they demanded of the scientist was, that he should make a
strong appeal to their imagination.From the above, it would almost seem as if the veryreversehad been
achieved, as if a suddenjumphad been made: as a matter of fact, the
schooling which the moral hyperboles afforded, gradually prepared the
way for thatmilder form of pathoswhich at last became incarnate in
the scientific man....Conscientiousness in small things,the self-control of the religious
man, was a preparatory school for the scientific character, as was
also, in a very pre-eminent sense, the attitude of mind which makes a
mantake problems seriously,irrespective of what personal advantage
he may derive from them....(b)The Starting-point of Epistemology.>470.Profound disinclination to halt once and for all at any collective view
of the world. The charm of the opposite point of view: the refusal to
relinquish the stimulus residing in the enigmatical.471.The hypothesis that, at bottom, things proceed in such a moral fashion
thathuman reason must be right,is a mere piece of good-natured
and simple-minded trustfulness, the result of the belief in Divine
truthfulness—God regarded as the Creator of all things.—These
concepts are our inheritance from a former existence in a Beyond.472.The contradiction of the so-called "facts of consciousness."
Observation a thousand times more difficult, error is perhaps the
absoluteconditionof observation.473.The intellect cannot criticise itself, simply because it can be
compared with no other kind of intellect, and also because its ability
to know would only reveal itself in the presence of "actual reality";
that is to say, because, in order to criticise the intellect, we should
have to be highercreatures with "absolute knowledge." This would
presuppose the existence ofsomething,a "thing-in-itself," apart
from all the perspective kinds of observation and senso-spiritual
perception. But the psychological origin of the belief inthings,forbids our speaking of "things in themselves."474.The idea that a sort of adequate relation exists betweensubjectandobject,that the object is something whichwhen seen from insidewould be a subject, is a well-meant invention which, I believe, has
seen its best days. The measure of that which we are conscious of, is
perforce entirely dependent upon the coarse utility of the function of
consciousness: how could this little garret-prospect of consciousness
warrant our asserting anything in regard to "subject" and "object,"
which would bear any relation to reality!475.Criticism of modern philosophy: erroneous starting-point, as if there
were such things as "facts of consciousness"—and nophenomenalisminintrospection.476."Consciousness"—to what extent is the idea which is thought of, the
idea of will, or the idea of a feeling (which is known by us alone),
quite superficial? Ourinnerworld is also "appearance."477.I am convinced of the phenomenalism of theinnerworld also:
everything that reaches our consciousness is utterly and completely
adjusted, simplified, schematised, interpreted, theactualprocess
of inner "perception," therelation of causesbetween thoughts,
feelings, desires, between subject and object, is absolutely concealed
from us, and may be purely imaginary. This "innerworld of
appearance" is treated with precisely the same forms and procedures as
the "outer" world. We never come across a single "fact": pleasure and
pain are more recently evolved intellectual phenomena....Causality evades us; to assume the existence of an immediate causal
relation between thoughts, as Logic does, is the result of the coarsest
and most clumsy observation. There areall sorts of passionsthat may
intervene between two thoughts: but the interaction is too rapid—that
is why wefail to recognisethem, that is why we actuallydenytheir existence...."Thinking," as the epistemologists understand\rit, never takes
place at all: it is an absolutely gratuitous fabrication, arrived at
by selecting one element from the process and by eliminating all the
rest—an artificial adjustment for the purpose of the understanding....The "mind,"something that thinks: at times, even, "the mind absolute
and pure"—this concept is an evolved and second result of false
introspection, which believes in "thinking": in the firstplace an act
is imagined here which does not really occur at all,i.e."thinking";
and,secondly,a subject-substratum is imagined in which every
process of this thinking has its origin, and nothing else—that is to
say,both the action and the agent are fanciful.478.Phenomenalism must not be sought in the wrong quarter: nothing is more
phenomenal, or, to be more precise, nothing is so muchdeception,as
this inner world, which we observe with the "inner sense."Our belief that the will is a cause was so great, that, according to
our personal experiences in general, we projected a cause into all
phenomena (i.e.a certain motive is posited as the cause of all
phenomena).We believe that the thoughts which follow one upon the other in our
minds are linked by some sort of causal relation: the logician, more
especially, who actually speaks of a host of facts which have never
once been seen in reality, has grown accustomed to the prejudice that
thoughtsare the causeof thoughts.We believe—and even our philosophers believe it still—that pleasure
and pain are the causes of reactions, that the very purpose of pleasure
and pain is to occasion reactions. For hundreds of years, pleasure and
pain have been represented as themotivesfor every action. Upon
reflection, however, we are bound to concede that everything would have
proceeded in exactly the same way, according to precisely the same
sequence of causeand effect, if the states "pleasure" and "pain" had
been entirely absent; and that we are simply deceived when we believe
that they actually cause anything:—they are theattendant phenomena,and they have quite a different purpose from that of provoking
reactions; they are in themselves effects involved in the process of
reaction which takes place.In short:Everything that becomes conscious is a final phenomenon, a
conclusion—and is the cause of nothing; all succession of phenomena
in consciousness is absolutely atomistic.—And we tried to understand
the universe from theoppositepoint of view—as if nothing were
effective or real, save thinking, feeling, willing! ...479.The phenomenalism of the "inner world!" A chronological inversion
takes place,so that the cause reaches consciousness as the
effect.—We know that pain is projected into a certain part of the
body although it is not really situated there; we have learnt that all
sensations which were ingenuously supposed to be conditioned by the
outer world are, as a matter of fact, conditioned by the inner world:
that the real action of the outer world never takes place in a way of
which we can become conscious.... That fragment of the outer world of
which we become conscious, is born after the effect produced by the
outer world has been recorded, and is subsequently interpreted as the
"cause" of that effect....In the phenomenalism of the "inner world," the chronological order
of cause and effect is inverted. The fundamental fact of "inner
experience" is, that the cause is imagined after the effect has been
recorded.... The same holds good of the sequence of thoughts: we seek
for the reason of a thought, before it has reached our consciousness;
and then the reason reaches consciousness first, whereupon follows
its effect. All our dreams are the interpretation of our collective
feelings with the view of discovering the possible causes of the
latter; and the process is such that a condition only becomes
conscious, when the supposed causal link has reached consciousness.[1]The whole of "inner experience" is founded on this: that a cause is
sought and imagined which accounts for a certain irritation in our
nerve-centres, and that it is only the cause which is found in this way
which reaches consciousness; this cause may have absolutely nothing to
do with the real cause—it is a sort of groping assisted by former
"inner experiences," that is to say, by memory. The memory, however,
retains the habit of old interpretations,—that is to say, of erroneous
causality,—so that "inner experience" comprises in itself all the
results of former erroneous fabrications of causes. Our "outside
world," as we conceive it every instant, is indissolubly bound up with
theold error of cause: we interpret by means of the schematism of
"the thing," etc."Inner experience" only enters consciousness when it has found a
language which the individual canunderstand—that is to say, a
translation of a certain condition into conditions with which he isfamiliar;"understand" means simply this: to be able to express
something new in the terms of something old or familiar. For instance,
"I feel unwell"—a judgment of this sort presupposes avery great and
recent neutrality on the part of the observer:the simple man always
says, "This and that make me feel unwell,"—he begins to be clear
concerning his indisposition only after he has discovered a reason for
it.... This is what I calla lack of philologicalknowledge; to be
able to read a text,as such,without reading an interpretation into
it, is the latest form of "inner experience,"—it is perhaps a barely
possible form....[1]When in our dream we hear a bell ringing, or a tapping at
our door, we scarcely ever wake before having already accounted for the
sound, in the terms of the dream-world we were in.—TR.480.There are no such things as "mind," reason, thought, consciousness,
soul, will, or truth: they all belong to fiction, and can serve no
purpose. It is not a question of "subject and object," but of a
particular species of animal which can prosper only by means of a
certainexactness,or, better still,regularityin recording its
perceptions (in order that experience may be capitalised)....Knowledge works as aninstrumentof power. It is therefore obvious
that it increases with each advance of power....The purpose of knowledge: in this case, as in the case of "good" or
"beautiful," the concept must be regarded strictly and narrowly from an
anthropocentric and biological standpoint. In order that a particular
species may maintain and increase its power, its conception of reality
must contain enough which is calculable and constant to allow of its
formulating a scheme of conduct.The utility of preservation—andnotsome abstract or theoretical need to eschew deception—stands as
the motive force behind the development of the organs of knowledge; ...
they evolve in such a way that their observations may suffice for our
preservation. In other words, themeasureof the desire for knowledge
depends upon the extent to whichthe Will to Powergrows in a certain
species: a species gets a grasp of a given amount of reality,in order
to master it, in order to enlist that amount in its service.(c)The Belief in the "Ego." Subject.481.In opposition to Positivism, which halts at phenomena and says,
"These are onlyfactsand nothing more," I would say: No,
facts are precisely what is lacking, all that exists consists ofinterpretations.We cannot establish any fact "in itself": it
may even be nonsense to desire to do such a thing. "Everything issubjective," ye say: but that in itself isinterpretation.The
subject is nothing given, but something superimposed by fancy,
somethingintroduced behind.—Is it necessary to set an interpreter
behind the interpretation already to hand? Even that would be fantasy,
hypothesis.To the extent to which knowledge has any sense at all, the world is
knowable: but it may be interpreteddifferently,it has not one sense
behind it, but hundreds of senses.—"Perspectivity."It is our needs thatinterpret the world; our instincts and their
impulses for and against. Every instinct is a sort of thirst for power;
each has its point of view, which it would fain impose upon all the
other instincts as their norm.482.Where our ignorance really begins, at that point from which we can see
no further, we set a word; for instance, the word "I," the word "do,"
the word "suffer"—these concepts may be the horizon lines of our
knowledge, but they are not "truths."483.Owing to the phenomenon "thought," the ego is taken for granted; but
up to the present everybody believed, like the people, that there
was something unconditionally certain in the notion "I think," and
that by analogy with our understanding of all other causal reactions
this "I" was the givencauseof the thinking. However customary
and indispensable this fiction may have become now, this fact proves
nothing against the imaginarynature of its origin; it might be a
life-preserving belief andstillbefalse.484."Something is thought, therefore there is something that thinks": this
is what Descartes' argument amounts to. But this is tantamount to
considering our belief in the notion "substance" as an "a priori"
truth:—that there must be something "that thinks" when we think, is
merely a formulation of a grammatical custom which sets an agent to
every action. In short, a metaphysico-logical postulate is already put
forward here—and it is not merelyan ascertainment of fact....On
Descartes' lines nothing absolutely certain is attained, but only the
fact of a very powerful faith.If the proposition be reduced to "Something is thought, therefore there
are thoughts," the result is mere tautology; and precisely the one
factor which is in question, the "realityof thought," is not touched
upon,—so that, in this form, the apparitional character of thought
cannot be denied. What Descarteswantedto prove was, that thought
not only hadapparent reality,but absolute reality.485.The conceptsubstanceis an outcome of the conceptsubject,and not
conversely! If we surrender the concept soul, the subject, the very
conditions for the concept "substance" are lacking.Degrees of Beingare obtained, but Being is lost.Criticism of "reality": what does a"plus or minus of reality"lead
to, the gradation of Being in which we believe?The degree of our feeling oflifeandpower(the logic and
relationship of past life) presents us with the measure of "Being,"
"reality," "non-appearance."Subject ithis is the term we apply to our belief in anentityunderlying all the different moments of the most intense sensations
of reality; we regard this belief as the effect of a cause,—and we
believe in our belief to such an extent that, on its account alone,
we imagine "truth," "reality," "substantiality."—a "Subject" is the
fiction which would fain make us believe that several similar states
were the effect of one substratum: but we it was who firstcreatedthe "similarity" of these states; the similising and adjusting of them
is thefact—nottheir similarity (on the contrary, this ought rather
to be denied).486.One would have to know whatBeingis, in order to be able todecidewhether this or that is real (for instance, "the facts of
consciousness"); it would also be necessary to know whatcertaintyandknowledgeare, and so forth.—But, as we donotknow these
things, a criticism of the faculty of knowledge is nonsensical: how is
it possible for an instrument to criticise itself, when it is itself
that exercises the critical faculty. It cannot even define itself!487.Should not all philosophy ultimately disclose the first principles on
which the reasoning processes depend?—that is to say, ourbeliefin the "ego" as a substance, as the only reality according to which,
alone, we are able to ascribe reality to things? The oldest realism
at length comes to light, simultaneously with man's recognition of
the fact that his whole religious history is no more than a history
of soul-superstitions.Here there is a barrier;our very thinking,
itself, involves that belief (with its distinctions—substance,
accident, action, agent, etc.); to abandon it would mean to cease from
being able to think.But that a belief, however useful it may be for the preservation of a
species, has nothing to do with the truth, may be seen from the fact
that wemustbelieve in time, space, and motion, without feeling
ourselves compelled to regard them as absolute realities.488.The psychological origin of our belief in reason.—The ideas
"reality," "Being," are derived from oursubject-feeling."Subject," interpreted through ourselves so that the ego may stand as
substance, as the cause of action, as theagent.The metaphysico-logical postulates, the belief in substance, accident,
attribute, etc. etc., draws its convincing character from our habit of
regarding all our actions as the result of our will: so thatthe ego,
as substance, does not vanish in the multiplicity of changes.—But
there is no such thing as will.We have no categories which allow
us to separate a "world as thing-in-itself," from "a world of
appearance." All ourcategories of reasonhave a sensual origin: they
are deductions from the empirical world. "The soul," "the ego"—the
history of these concepts shows that here, also, the oldest distinction
("spiritus," "life") obtains....If there is nothing material, then there can be nothing immaterial. The
concept no longermeansanything.No subject-"atoms." The sphere of a subjectincreasingordiminishingunremittingly, the centre of the system continuallydisplacingitself, in the event of the system no longer being able
to organise the appropriated mass, it divides into two. On the other
hand, it is able, without destroying it, to transform a weaker subject
into one of its own functionaries, and, to a certain extent, to compose
a new entity with it. Not a "substance," but rather something which in
itself strives after greater strength; and which wishes to "preserve"
itself only indirectly (it wishes tosurpassitself).489.Everything that reaches consciousness as an entity is already
enormously complicated: we never have anything more than thesemblance
of an entity.The phenomenon of thebodyis the richer, moredistinct, and more
tangible phenomenon: it should be methodically drawn to the front, and
no mention should be made of its ultimate significance.490.The assumption of asingle subjectis perhaps not necessary, it
may be equally permissible to assume a plurality of subjects, whose
interaction and struggle lie at the bottom of our thought and our
consciousness in general. A sort ofaristocracyof "cells" in which
the ruling power is vested? Of course an aristocracy of equals, who are
accustomed to ruling co-operatively, and understand how to command?My hypotheses. The subject as a plurality. Pain intellectual and
dependent upon the judgment harmful, projected. The effect always
"unconscious": the inferred and imagined cause is projected, itfollowsthe event. Pleasure is a form of pain. The only kind of power
that exists is of the same nature as the power of will: a commanding
of other subjects which thereupon alter themselves. The unremitting
transientness and volatility of the subject. "Mortal soul."Numberas
perspective form.491.The belief in the body is more fundamental than the belief in the soul:
the latter arose fromthe unscientific observation of the agonies
of the body. (Something which leaves it. The belief in thetruth of
dreams)492.The body and physiology the starting-point: why?—We obtain a correct
image of the nature of our subject-entity, that is to say, as a
number of regents at the head of a community (not as "souls" or as
"life-forces") as also of the dependence of these regents upon their
subjects, and upon the conditions of a hierarchy, and of the division
of labour, as the means ensuring the existence of the part and the
whole. We also obtain a correct image of the way in which the living
entities continually come into being and expire, and we see how
eternity cannot belong to the "subject"; we realise that the struggle
finds expression in obeying as well as in commanding, and that a
fluctuating definition of the limits of power is a factor of life. The
comparativeignorancein which the ruler is kept, of the individual
performances and even disturbances taking place in the community,
also belong to the conditions under which government may be carried
on. In short, we obtain a valuation even ofwant-of-knowledge,of seeing-things-generally-as-a-whole, of simplification, of
falsification, and of perspective. What is most important, however,
is, that we regard the ruler and his subjects as of thesame kind,all feeling, willing, thinking—and that wherever we see or suspect
movement in a body, we conclude that there isco-operative-subjective
and invisible life. Movement as a symbol for the eye; it denotes that
something has been felt, willed, thought.The danger of directly questioning the subjectconcerningthe
subject, and all spiritual self-reflection, consists in this, that it
might be a necessary condition of its activity to interpret itselferroneously.That is why we appeal to the body and lay the evidence
of sharpened senses aside: or we try and see whether the subjects
themselves cannot enter into communication with us.(d)Biology of the Instinct of Knowledge. Perspectivity.493.Truth is that kind of errorwithout which a certain species of living
being cannot exist. The value forLifeis ultimately decisive.494.It is unlikely that our "knowledge" extends farther than is exactly
necessary for our self-preservation. Morphology shows us how the
senses and the nerves as well as the brain evolve in proportion as the
difficulties of acquiring sustenance increase.495.If the morality of "Thou shalt not lie" be refuted, the sense for truth
will then have to justifyitself before another tribunal—as a means
to the preservation of man,as Will to Power.Likewise our love of the beautiful: it is also thecreative will.Both senses stand side by side; the sense of truth is the means
wherewith the power is appropriated to adjust things according to one's
taste. The love of adjusting and reforming—a primeval love! We can
onlytake cognisanceof a world which we ourselves havemade.496.Concerning the multifariousness of knowledge. The tracing ofitsrelation to many other things (or the relation of kind)—how should
"knowledge" be of another? The way to know and to investigate is in
itself among the conditions of life; that is why the conclusion that
there could be no other kind of intellect (for ourselves) than the kind
which serves the purpose of our preservation is an excessively hasty
one: thisactualcondition may be only an accidental, not in the
least an essential; one.Our apparatus for acquiring knowledge is not adjusted for knowledge.497.The most strongly credited a priori "truths" are, to my mind, mere
assumptions pending further investigation; for instance, the law
of causation isa belief so thoroughly acquired by practice and so
completely assimilated, that to disbelieve in it would mean the ruin of
our kind. But is it therefore true? What an extraordinary conclusion!
As if truth were proved by the mere fact that man survives!498.To what extent is ourintellectalso a result of the conditions of
life?—We should not have it did we notneedto have it, and we
should not have itaswe have it, if we did not need itaswe need
it—that is to say, if we could live otherwise.499.Thinking in a primitive (inorganic) state is topersevere in forms,as in the case of the crystal.—Inourthought, theessential
factoris the harmonising of the new material with the old schemes (=
Procrustes' bed), theassimilationof the unfamiliar.500.The perception of the senses projected outwards: "inwards" and
"outwards"—does thebodycommand here?The same equalising and ordering power which rules in the idioplasma,
also rules in the incorporation of the outer world: our sensual
perceptions are already theresultof this process ofadaptationandharmonisationin regard toallthe past in us; they do not
follow directly upon the "impression."501.All thought, judgment, perception, regarded as an act ofcomparing[2]has as a first condition the act ofequalising,and earlier still the
act of"making equal."The process of making equal is the same as the
assimilation by the amœba of the nutritive matter it appropriates."Memory" late, in so far as the equalising instinct appears to have
beensubdued: the difference is preserved. Memory—a process of
classification and collocation; active—who?