[4]SeeBeyond Good and Evil,in this edition, Aph. 13.651.The most-fundamental—and most primeval activity of a protoplasm cannot
be ascribed to a will to self-preservation, for it absorbs an amount
of material which is absurdly out of proportion with the needs of its
preservation: and what is more, it doesnot"preserve itself" in the
process, but actually falls topieces....The instinct which rules
here, must account for this total absence in the organism of a desire
to preserve itself: hunger is already an interpretation based upon the
observation of a more or less complex organism (hunger is a specialised
and later form of the instinct; it is an expression of the system of
divided labour, in the service of a higher instinct which rules the
whole).652.It is just as impossible to regardhungeras theprimum mobile,as
it is to take self-preservation to be so. Hunger, considered as the
result of insufficient nourishment, means hunger as the result of a
will to powerwhich can no longer dominateIt is not a question of
replacing a loss, it is only later on, as the result of the division of
labour, when the Will to Power has discovered other and quite different
ways of gratifying itself, that the appropriating lust of the organism
isreducedto hunger—to the need of replacing what has been lost.653.We can but laugh at the false "Altruism" of biologists: propagation
among the amœbæ appears as a process of jetsam, as an advantage to
them. It is an excretion of useless matter.654.The division of a protoplasm into two takes place when its power is
no longer sufficient to subjugate the matter it has appropriated:
procreation is the result of impotence.In the cases in which the males seek the females and become one with
them, procreation is the result of hunger.655.The weaker vessel is driven to the stronger from a need of nourishment;
it desires to get under it,if possible to becomeonewith it. The
stronger, on the contrary, defends itself from others; it refuses to
perish in this way; it prefers rather to split itself into two or more
parts in the process of growing. One may conclude that the greater the
urgency seems to become one with something else, the more weakness in
some form is present. The greater the tendency to variety, difference,
inner decay, the more strength is actually to hand.The instinct to cleave to something, and the instinct to repel
something, are in the inorganic as in the organic world, the uniting
bond. The whole distinction is a piece of hasty judgment.The will to power in every combination of forces,defending itself
against the stronger and coming down unmercifully upon the weaker, is
more correct.N. B.All processes may be regarded as "beings".656.The will to power can manifest itself only againstobstacles;it
therefore goes in search of what resists it—this is the primitive
tendency of the protoplasm when it extends itspseudopodiaand feels
about it. The act of appropriation and assimilation is, above all, the
result of a desire to overpower, a process of forming, of additional
building and rebuilding, until at last the subjected creature has
become completely a part of the superior creature's sphere of power,
and has increased the latter.—If this process of incorporation
does not succeed, then the whole organism falls to pieces; and theseparationoccurs as the result of the will to power: in order to
prevent the escape of thatwhich has been subjected, the will to power
falls into two wills (under some circumstances without even abandoning
completely its relation to the two)."Hunger" is only a more narrow adaptation, once the fundamental
instinct of power has won power of a more abstract kind.657.What is "passive"?To be hindered in the outward movement of grasping: it is
thus an act of resistance and reaction.What is "active"?To stretch out for power."Nutrition"...Is only a derived phenomenon; the primitive form of it was
the will to stuff everything inside one's own skin."Procreation"...Only derived; originally, in those cases In which one
will was unable to organise the collective mass it had
appropriated, anopposing willcame into power, which
undertook to effect the separation and establish a new
centre of organisation, after a struggle with the original
will."Pleasure"...Is a feeling of power (presupposing the existence of pain).658.(1) The organic functions shown to be but forms of the fundamental
will, the will to power,—and buds thereof.(2) The will to power specialises itself as will to nutrition, to
property, totools,to servants (obedience), and to rulers: the body
as an example.—The stronger will directs the weaker. There is no other
form of causality than that of will to will. It is not to be explained
mechanically.(3) Thinking, feeling, willing, in all living organisms. What is a
desire if it be not: a provocation of the feeling of power by an
obstacle (or, better still, by rhythmical obstacles and resisting
forces)—so that it surges through it? Thus in all pleasure pain is
understood.—If the pleasure is to be very great, the pains preceding
it must have been very long, and the whole bow of life must have been
strained to the utmost.(4) Intellectual functions. The will to shaping, forming, and making
like, etc.(b) Man.659.With the body as clue.—Granting that the "soul" was only an
attractive and mysterious thought,from which philosophers rightly,
but reluctantly, separated themselves—that which they have since
learnt to put in its place is perhaps even more attractive and even
more mysterious. The humanbody,in which the whole of the most
distant and most recent past of all organic life once more becomes
living and corporal, seems to flow through, this past and right over
it like a huge and inaudible torrent; the body is a more wonderful
thought than the old "soul." In all ages the body, as our actual
property, as our most certain being, in short, as our ego, has been
more earnestly believed in than the spirit (or the "soul," or the
subject, as the school jargon now calls it). It has never occurred to
any one to regard his stomach as a strange or a divine stomach; but
that there is a tendency and a predilection in man to regard all his
thoughts as "inspired," all his values as "imparted to him by a God,"
all his instincts as dawning activities—this is proved by the evidence
of every age in man's history. Even now, especially among artists,
there may very often be noticed a sort of wonder, and a deferential
hesitation to decide, when the question occurs to them, by what means
they achieved their happiest work, and from which world the creative
thought came down to them: when they question in this way, they are
possessed by a feeling of guilelessness and childish shyness. They dare
not say: "That came from me; it was my hand which threw that die."
Conversely, even those philosophers and theologians, who in their logic
and piety found the most imperative reasons for regarding their body as
adeception (and even as a deception overcome and disposed of), could
not help recognising the foolish fact that the body still remained: and
the most unexpected proofs of this are to be found partly in Pauline
and partly in Vedantic philosophy. But what doesstrength of faithultimately mean? Nothing!—A strong faith might also be a foolish
faith!—There is food for reflection.And supposing the faith in the body were ultimately but the result
of a conclusion; supposing it were a false conclusion, as idealists
declare it is, would it not then involve some doubt concerning the
trustworthiness of the spirit itself which thus causes us to draw wrong
conclusions?Supposing the plurality of things, and space, and time, and motion
(and whatever the other first principles of a belief in the body may
be) were errors—what suspicions would not then be roused against the
spirit which led us to form such first principles? Let it suffice that
the belief in the body is, at any rate for the present, a much stronger
belief than the belief in the spirit, and he who would fain undermine
it assails the authority of the spirit most thoroughly in so doing!660.The Body as an Empire.The aristocracy in the body, the majority of the rulers (the fight
between the cells and the tissues).Slavery and the division of labour: the higher type alone possible
through thesubjectionof the lower to a function.Pleasure and pain, not contraries. The feeling of power."Nutrition" only a result of the insatiable lust of appropriation in
the Will to Power."Procreation": this is the decay which supervenes when the ruling cells
are too weak to organise appropriated material.It is themouldingforce which will have a continual supply of new
material (more "force"). The masterly construction of an organism out
of an egg."The mechanical interpretation": recognises only quantities: but the
real energy is in the quality. Mechanics can therefore only describe
processes; it cannot explain them."Purpose." We should start out from the "sagacity" of plants.The concept of "meliorism":notonly greater complexity, but greaterpower(it need not be only greater masses).Conclusion concerning the evolution of man: the road to perfection lies
in the bringing forth of the most powerful individuals, for whose use
the great masses would be converted into mere tools (that is to say,
into the most intelligent and flexible tools possible).661.Why is allactivity,even that of asense,associated with
pleasure? Because, before the activity was possible, an obstacle or
a burden was done away with. Or, rather, because all action is a
process of overcoming, of becoming master of, and ofincreasingthefeeling of power? The pleasureof thought. Ultimately it is not
only the feeling of power, but also the pleasure of creating and of
contemplating thecreation:for all activity enters our consciousness
in the form of "works."662.Creating is an act of selecting and of finishing the thing selected.
(In every act of the will, this is the essential element.)663.All phenomena which are the result of intentions may be reduced tothe
intention of increasing power.664.When we do anything, we are conscious of afeeling of strength;we often have this sensation before the act—that is to say, while
imagining the thing to do (as, for instance, at the sight of an enemy,
of an obstacle, which we feelequal to): it is always an accompanying
sensation. Instinctively we think that this feeling of strength is
the cause of the action, that it is the "motive force." Our belief in
causation is the belief in force and its effect; it is a transcript
of our experience: in which we identify force and the feeling of
force.—Force, however, never moves things; the strength which is
conscious "does not set the muscles moving." "Of such a process we have
no experience, no idea." "We experience as little concerningforce as
a motive power, as concerning thenecessityof a movement." Force is
said to be the constraining element! "All we know is that one thing
follows another;—we know nothing of either compulsion or arbitrariness
in regard to the one following the other. Causality is first invented
by thinking compulsion into the sequence of processes. A certain
"understanding" of the thing is the result—that is to say, we humanise
the process a little, we make it more "familiar"; the familiar is the
known habitual fact ofhuman compulsion associated with the feeling of
force.665.I have the intention of extending my arm; taking it for granted that
I know as little of the physiology of the human body and of the
mechanical laws of its movements as the man in the street, what could
there be more vague, more bloodless, more uncertain than this intention
compared with what follows it? And supposing I were the astutest
of mechanics, and especially conversant with the formulæ which are
applicable in this case, I should not be able to extend my arm one
whit the better. Our "knowledge" and our "action" in this case lie
coldly apart: as though in two different regions.—Again: Napoleon
carries out a plan of campaign—what does that mean? In this case,
everything concerning the consummation of the campaign isknown,because everything must be done through words of command: but even here
subordinates are taken for granted, who applyand adapt the general
plan to the particular emergency, to the degree of strength, etc.666.For ages we have always ascribed the value of an action, of a
character, of an existence, to theintention,to thepurposefor
which it was done, acted, or lived: this primeval idiosyncrasy of taste
ultimately takes a dangerous turn provided the lack of intention and
purpose in all phenomena comes ever more to the front in consciousness.
With it a general depreciation of all values seems to be preparing:
"All is without sense."—This melancholy phrase means: "All sense
lies in the intention, and if the intention is absolutely lacking,
then sense must be lacking too." In conformity with this valuation,
people were forced to place the value of life in a a life after death,
or in the progressive development of ideas, or of mankind, or of the
people, or of man to superman; but in this way theprogressus in
infinitumof purpose had been reached: it was ultimately necessary to
find one's self a place in the process of the world (perhaps with the
disdæmonistic outlook, it was a process which led to nonentity).In regard to this point, "purpose" needs a somewhat more severe
criticism: it ought to be recognised that an actionis never
caused by a purpose;that an object and the means thereto are
interpretations, by means of which certain points in a phenomena
are selected and accentuated, at the cost of other, more numerous,
points, that everytime something is done for a purpose, something
fundamentally different, and yet other things happen; that in regard
to the action done with a purpose, the case is the same as with the
so-called purposefulness of the heat which is radiated from the sun:
the greater part of the total sum is squandered; a portion of it, which
is scarcely worth reckoning, has a "purpose," has "sense"; that an
"end" with its "means" is an absurdly indefinite description, which
indeed may be able to command as a precept, as "will," but presupposes
a system of obedient and trained instruments, which, in the place of
the indefinite, puts forward a host of determined entities(i.e.we
imagine a system ofcleverbut narrow intellects who postulate end
and means, in order to be able to grant our only known "end," the rôle
of the "cause of an action,"—a proceeding to which we have no right:
it is tantamount to solving a problem by placing its solution in an
inaccessible world which we cannot observe).Finally, why could not an "end" be merely anaccompanying featurein the series of changes among the active forces which bring about
the action—a pale stenographic symbol stretched in consciousness
beforehand, and which serves as a guide to what happens, even as
a symbol of what happens,notas its cause?—But in this way we
criticisewillitself: is it not an illusion to regard that which
enters consciousness as will-power, as a cause? Are not all conscious
phenomena only final phenomena—the lost links in a chain, but
apparently conditioning one another in theirsequence within the plane
of consciousness? This might be an illusion.667.Science doesnotinquire what impels us to will: on the contrary, itdeniesthatwillingtakes place at all, and supposes that something
quite different has happened—in short, that the belief in "will" and
"end" is an illusion. It does not inquire into themotivesof an
action, as if these had been present in consciousness previous to the
action, but it first divides the action up into a group of phenomena,
and then seeks the previous history of this mechanical movement—butnotin the terms of feeling, perception, and thought; from this
quarter it can never accept the explanation: perception is precisely
the matter of science,which has to be explained.—The problem of
science is precisely to explain the world,withouttaking perceptions
as the cause: for that would mean regardingperceptionsthemselves
as thecauseof perceptions. The task of science is by no means
accomplished.Thus: either there isnosuch thing as will,—the hypothesis of
science,—or the will isfree. The latter assumption represents the
prevailing feeling, of which we cannot rid ourselves, even if the
hypothesis of science wereproved.The popular belief in cause and effect is founded on the principle that
free willis the cause of every effect:thereby alone do we arrive
at the feeling of causation. And thereto belongs also the feeling that
every cause isnotan effect, but always only a cause—if will is
the cause. "Our acts of will arenot necessary"—this lies in the
veryconcept of "will."The effect necessarily comesafterthe
cause—that is what we feel. It is merely ahypothesisthat even our
willing is compulsory in every case.668."To will" is not "to desire," to strive, to aspire to; it distinguishes
itself from that through thepassion of commanding.There is no such thing as "willing," but only the willing ofsomething:theaimmust not be severed from the state—as the
epistemologists sever it. "Willing," as they understand it, is no more
possible than "thinking": it is a pure invention.It is essential to willing that something should becommanded(but
that does not mean that the will is carried into effect).The generalstate of tension,by virtue of which a force seeks to
discharge itself, is not "willing."669."Pain" and "pleasure" are the most absurdmeans of expressingjudgments, which of course does not mean that the judgments which are
enunciated in this way must necessarily be absurd. The elimination
of all substantiation and logic, a yes or no in the reduction to a
passionate desire to have or to reject, an imperative abbreviation, the
utility of which is irrefutable: that is pain and pleasure. Its origin
is in the central sphereof the intellect; its prerequisite is an
infinitely accelerated process of perceiving, ordering, co-ordinating,
calculating, concluding: pleasure and pain are always final phenomena,
they are never causes.As to deciding what provokes pain and pleasure, that is a question
which depends upon thedegree of power:the same thing, when
confronted with a small quantity of power, may seem a danger and may
suggest the need of speedy defence, and when confronted with the
consciousness of greater power, may be a voluptuous stimulus and may be
followed by a feeling of pleasure.All feelings of pleasure and pain presuppose ameasuring of collective
utilityandcollective harmfulness: consequently a sphere where
there is the willing of an object (of a condition) and the selection of
the means thereto. Pleasure and pain are never "original facts."The feelings of pleasure and pain arereactions of the will(emotions) in which the intellectual centre fixes the value of certain
supervening changes as a collective value, and also as an introduction
of contrary actions.670.The belief in "emotions"—Emotions are a fabrication of the
intellect, an invention ofcauseswhich do not exist. All generalbodily sensationswhich we do not understand are interpreted
intellectually—that is to say, areasonis sought why we feel
thus or thus among certain people or in certainexperiences. Thus
something disadvantageous dangerous, and strange is taken for granted,
as if it were the cause of our being indisposed; as a matter of fact,
it getsadded tothe indisposition, so as to make our condition
thinkable.—Mighty rushes of blood to the brain, accompanied by
a feeling of suffocation, areinterpretedas anger: the people
and things which provoke our anger are a means of relieving our
physiological condition. Subsequently, after long habituation, certain
processes and general feelings are so regularly correlated that the
sight of certain processes provokes that condition of general feeling,
and induces vascular engorgements, the ejection of seminal fluid, etc.:
we then say that the "emotion is provoked by propinquity."Judgmentsalready inhere in pleasure and pain: stimuli become
differentiated, according as to whether they increase or reduce the
feeling of power.The belief in willing.To believe that a thought may be the cause
of a mechanical movement is to believe in miracles. Theconsistency
of sciencedemands that once we have made the worldthinkablefor
ourselves by means of pictures, we should also make the emotions, the
desires, the will, etc.,thinkable—that is to say, we shoulddenythem and treat them aserrors of the intellect.671.Free will or no free will?—There isno such thingas "Will": that
is only a simplifiedconception on the part of the understanding, like
"matter."All actions must first be prepared and made possible mechanically
before they can be willed.Or,in most casesthe "object" of an
action enters the brain only after everything is prepared for its
accomplishment. The object is an inner "stimulus"—nothingmore.672.The most proximate prelude to an action relates to that action: butfurther back stillthere lies a preparatory history which coversa
far wider field:the individual action is only a factor in a much more
extensive andsubsequentfact. The shorter and the longer processes
are not reported.673.The theory ofchance:the soul is a selecting and self-nourishing
being, which is persistently extremely clever and creative (thiscreativepower is commonly overlocked! it is taken to be merely
passive).I recognised theactiveand creativepowerwithin the
accidental.—Accident is in itself nothing more thanthe clashing of
creative impulses.674.Among the enormous multiplicity of phenomena to be observed in an
organic being, that part which becomesconsciousis a mere means:
and the particle of "virtue," "self abnegation,"and other fanciful
inventions, are denied in a most thoroughgoing manner by the whole of
the remaining phenomena. We would do well to study our organism in all
its immorality....The animal functions are, as a matter of fact, a million times more
important than all beautiful states of the soul and heights of
consciousness: the latter are an overflow, in so far as they are not
needed as instruments in the service of the animal functions. The whole
ofconsciouslife: the spirit together with the soul, the heart,
goodness, and virtue; in whose service does it work? In the greatest
possible perfection of the means (for acquiring nourishment and
advancement) serving the fundamental animal functions: above all, theascent of the line of Life.That which is called "flesh" and "body" is of such incalculably greater
importance, that the rest is nothing more than a small appurtenance.
To continue the chain of lifeso that it becomes ever more
powerful—that is the task.But now observe how the heart, the soul, virtue, and spirit together
conspire formally to thwart this purpose: asif theywere the object
of every endeavour! ... Thedegeneration of lifeis essentially
determined by the extraordinaryfallibility of consciousness,which
is held at bay least of all by the instincts, and thus commits the
gravest and profoundesterrors.Now could any more insane extravagance of vanity be imagined than
to measure thevalueof existence according to thepleasant or
unpleasant feelings of this consciousness? It is obviously onlya
means: and pleasant or unpleasant feelings are also no more than means.According to what standard is the objective value measured? According
to the quantity ofincreasedandmore organised poweralone.675.The value of allvaluing.—My desire would be to see the agent once
more identified with the action, after action has been deprived of all
meaning by having been separated in thought from the agent; I should
like to see the notion of doingsomething,the idea of a "purpose,"
of an "intention," of an object, reintroduced into the action, after
action has been made insignificant by having been artificially
separated from these things.All "objects," "purposes," "meanings," are only manners of expression
and metamorphoses of the one will inherent in all phenomena; of the
will to power. To have an object, a purpose, or an intention, in
factto willgenerally, is equivalent to the desire forgreater
strength,for fuller growth, and for themeanstheretoin addition.The most general and fundamental instinct in all action and willing
is precisely on that account the one which is least known and is most
concealed; for in practice we always follow its bidding, for the simple
reason that wearein ourselves its bidding....All valuations are only the results of, and the narrow points of view
inservings thisone will: valuingin itselfis nothing save this,—will to power.To criticise existence from the standpoint of any one of these
values is utter nonsense and error. Even supposing that a process of
annihilation follows from such a value, even so this process is in the
service of this will.Thevaluation of existence itself!But existence is this valuing
itself!—and even when we say "no," we still do what weare.We ought now to perceive theabsurdityof this pretence at judging
existence; and we ought to try and discoverwhatactually takes place
there. It is symptomatic.676.Concerning the Origin of our Valuations.We are able to analyse our body, and by doing so we get the same
idea of it as of the stellar system, and the differences between
organic and inorganic lapses. Formerly the movements of the stars were
explained as the effects of beings consciously pursuing a purpose:
this is no longer required, and even in regard to the movements of
the body and its changes, the belief has long since been abandoned
that they can be explained by an appeal to a consciousness which has
a determined purpose. By far the greater number of movements have
nothing to do with consciousness at all:neither have they anything
to do with sensation.Sensations and thoughts are extremelyrareandinsignificantthings compared with the innumerable phenomena
occurring every second.On the other hand, we believe that a certainconformity of means
to ends rules over the very smallest phenomenon, which it is quite
beyond our deepest science to understand; a sort of cautiousness,
selectiveness, co-ordination, and repairing process, etc. In short, we
are in the presence of anactivityto which it would be necessary
to ascribe anincalculably higher and more extensive intellectthan
the one we are acquainted with. We learn tothink less ofall that
is conscious: we unlearn the habit of making ourselves responsible for
ourselves, because, as conscious beings fixing purposes, we are but the
smallest part of ourselves.Of the numerous influences taking effect every second, for instance,
air, electricity, we feel scarcely anything at all. There might be a
number of forces, which, though they never make themselves felt by
us, yet influence us continually. Pleasure and pain are very rare and
scanty phenomena, compared with the countless stimuli with which a cell
or an organ operates upon another cell or organ.It is the phase of themodesty of consciousness.Finally, we can
grasp the conscious ego itself, merely as an instrument in the
service of that higher and more extensive intellect: and then we may
ask whether all consciouswilling,all consciouspurposes,allvaluations,are not perhaps only means by virtue of which something
essentiallydifferent is attained,from that which consciousness
supposes. Wemean: it is a question of ourpleasureandpainbut
pleasure and pain might be the means whereby wehad something to dowhich lies outside our consciousness.This is to show how verysuperficialall conscious phenomena
really are; how an action and the image of it differ; howlittlewe know about whatprecedesan action; how fantastic our feelings,
"freewill," and "cause and effect" are; how thoughts and images, just
like words, are only signs of thoughts; the impossibility of finding
the grounds of any action; the superficiality of all praise and blame;
howessentially ourconscious life is composed offanciesandillusion; how all our words merely stand for fancies (our emotions
too), and how theunion of mankinddepends upon the transmission
and continuation of these fancies: whereas, at bottom, the real union
of mankind by means of procreation pursues its unknown way. Does this
belief in the common fancies of men reallyaltermankind? Or is the
whole body of ideas and valuations only an expression in itself of
unknown changes?Are therereally such things as will, purposes,
thoughts, values? Is the whole of conscious life perhaps no more thanmirage? Even when values seem todeterminethe actions of a man,
they are, as a matter of fact, doing something quite different! In
short, granting that a certain conformity of means to end might be
demonstrated in the action of nature, without the assumption of a
ruling ego: could notournotion of purposes, and our will, etc., be
only asymbolic languagestanding for something quite different—that
is to say, something not-willing and unconscious? only the thinnest
semblance of that natural conformity of means to end in the organic
world, but not in any way different therefrom?Briefly, perhaps the whole of mental development is a matter of thebody:it is the consciously recorded history of the fact that ahigher body is forming.The organic ascends to higher regions.
Our longing to know Nature is a means by virtue of which the body
would reach perfection. Or, better still, hundreds of thousands of
experiments are made to alter the nourishment and the mode of living
of thebody: the body's consciousness and valuations, its kinds of
pleasure and pain, aresigns of these changes and experiments. In the
end, it is not a question concerning man; for he must be surpassed.677.To what Extent are all Interpretations of the World Symptoms of a
Ruling Instinct.Theartisticcontemplation of the world: to sit before the world
and to survey it. But here the analysis of æsthetical contemplation,
its reduction to cruelty, its feeling of security, its judicial and
detached attitude, etc., are lacking. The artist himself must be taken,
together with his psychology (the criticism of the instinct of play, as
a discharge of energy, the love of change, the love of bringing one's
soul in touch with strange things, the absolute egoism of the artist,
etc.). What instincts does he sublimate?Thescientificcontemplation of the world: a criticism of the
psychological longing for science, the desire to make everything
comprehensible; the desire to make everything practical, useful,
capable of being exploited—to what extent this isanti-æsthetic.
Only that value counts, which may be reckoned in figures. How it
happens that a mediocre type of man preponderates under the influence
of science. It would be terrible if even history were to be taken
possession of in this way—the realm of the superior, of the judicial.
What instincts are here sublimated!The religious contemplation of the world: a criticism of the religious
man. It is not necessary to take the moral man as the type, but the man
who has extreme feelings of exaltation and of deep depression, and who
interprets the former with thankfulness or suspicion without, however,
seeking their origin inhimself(nor the latter either). The man who
essentially feels anything but free, who sublimates his conditions and
states of submission.Themoralcontemplation of the world. The feelings peculiar to
certain social ranks are projected into the universe: stability,
law, the making of things orderly, and the making of things alike,
aresoughtin the highest spheres, because they are valued most
highly,—above everything or behind everything.What iscommonto all: the ruling instinctswish to be regardedasthe highest values in general,even as thecreativeandruling
powers.It is understood that these instincts either oppose or
overcome each other (join up synthetically, or alternate in power).
Their profound antagonism is, however, so great, that in those cases in
which theyallinsist upon being gratified, a man of very thoroughmediocrityis the outcome.678.It is a question whether the origin of our apparent "knowledge" is not
also a mere offshoot of ourolder valuations,which are so completely
assimilated that they belong to the very basis of our nature. In this
way onlythe more recentneeds engage in battlewith results of the
oldest needs.The world is seen, felt, and interpreted thus and thus, in order
that organic life may be preserved with this particular manner of
interpretation. Man isnotonly an individual, but the continuation
of collective organic life in one definite line. The fact thatmansurvives, proves that a certain species of interpretations (even though
it still be added to) has also survived; that, as a system, this method
of interpreting has not changed. "Adaptation."Our "dissatisfaction," our "ideal," etc., may possibly be theresultof this incorporated piece of interpretation, of our particular point
of view: the organic world may ultimately perish owing to it just as
the division of labour in organisms may be the means of bringing about
the ruin of the whole, if one part happen to wither or weaken. Thedestructionof organic life, and even of the highest form thereof,
must follow the same principles as the destruction of the individual.679.Judged from the standpoint of the theory of descent,individuationshows the continuous breakingup of one into two, and the equally
continuous annihilation of individualsfor the sake of a fewindividuals, which evolution bears onwards; the greater mass always
perishes ("the body").The fundamental phenomena:innumerable individuals are sacrificed for
the sake of a few,in order to make the few possible.—One must not
allow one's self to be deceived; the case is the same withpeoplesandraces: they produce the "body" for the generation of isolated and
valuableindividuals,who continue the great process.680.I am opposed to the theory that the individual studies the interests of
thespecies,or of posterity, at the cost of his own advantage: all
this is only apparent.The excessive importance which he attaches to thesexual instinctis not theresultof the latter's importance to the species, for
procreation is the actual performance of the individual, it is his
greatest interest, and therefore it is hishighest expression of
power(not judged from the standpoint of consciousness, but from the
very centre of the individual).681.Thefundamental errorsof the biologists who have lived hitherto: it
is not a matter of the species, but of rearing stronger individuals
(the many are only a means).Life isnotthe continuous adjustment of internalrelations to
external relations, but will to power, which, proceeding from inside,
subjugates and incorporates an ever-increasing quantity of "external"
phenomena.These biologistscontinuethe moral valuations ("the absolutely
higher worth of Altruism," the antagonism towards the lust of dominion,
towards war, towards all that which is not useful, and towards all
order of rank and of class).682.In natural science, the moral depreciation of theegostill goes hand
in hand with the overestimation of thespecies.But the species is
quite as illusory as the ego: a false distinction has been made. The
ego is a hundred timesmorethan a mere unit in a chain of creatures;
it is the chainitself,in every possible respect, and the species
is merely an abstraction suggested by the multiplicity and partial
similarity of these chains. That the individual issacrificedto the
species, as people often say he is, is not a fact at all: it is rather
only an example of false interpretation.683.The formula of the"progress"-superstitionaccording to a famous
physiologist of the cerebral regions:—"L'animal ne fait jamais de progrès comme espèce. L'homme seul fait de
progrès comme espèce."No.684.Anti-Darwin.—Thedomestication of man:what definite value can
it have, or has domestication in itself a definite value?—There are
reasons for denying the latter proposition.Darwin's school of thought certainly goes to great pains to convince
us of the reverse: it would fain prove that the influence of
domestication may be profound and fundamental. For the time being, we
stand firmly as we did before; up to the present no results save very
superficial modification or degeneration have been shown to follow upon
domestication. And everything that escapes from the hand and discipline
of man, returns almost immediately to its original natural condition.
The type remains constant, man cannot "dénaturer la nature."Biologists reckon upon the struggle for existence, the death of the
weaker creature and the survival of the most robust, most gifted
combatant; on that account they imagine acontinuous increase in the
perfection of all creatures.We, on the contrary, have convinced
ourselves of the fact, that in the struggle for existence, accident
serves the cause of the weak quite as much as that of the strong;
that craftiness often supplements strength with advantage; that theprolificnessof a species is related in a remarkable manner to that
specieschances of destruction....Natural Selectionis also credited with the power of slowly
effecting unlimited metamorphoses: it is believed that every advantage
istransmitted by heredity, and strengthened in the course of
generations (when heredity is known to be so capricious that ...);
the happy adaptations of certain creatures to very special conditions
of life, are regarded as the result ofsurrounding influences.Nowhere, however, are examples ofunconscious selectionto be found
(absolutely nowhere). The most different individuals associate one with
the other; the extremes become lost in the mass. Each vies with the
other to maintain his kind; those creatures whose appearance shields
them from certain dangers, do not alter this appearance when they are
in an environment quite devoid of danger.... If they live in places
where their coats or their hides do not conceal them, they do not adapt
themselves to their surroundings in any way.Theselection of the most beautifulhas been so exaggerated, that
it greatly exceeds the instincts for beauty in our own race! As a
matter of fact, the most beautiful creature often couples with the
most debased, and the largest with the smallest. We almost always see
males and females taking advantage of their first chance meeting, and
manifesting no taste or selectiveness at all.—Modification through
climate and nourishment—but as a matter of fact unimportant.There are nointermediate forms.—The growing evolution of creatures is assumed. All grounds for this
assumption are entirely lacking. Every type has itslimitations:
beyond these evolution cannot carry it.My general point of view. First proposition: Man as a species isnotprogressing. Higher specimens are indeed attained; but they do
not survive. The general level of the species is not raised.Second proposition: Man as a species does not represent any sort of
progress compared with any other animal. The whole of the animal and
plant world does not develop from the lower to the higher.... but all
simultaneously, haphazardly, confusedly, and at variance. The richest
and most complex forms—and the term "higher type" means no more than
this—perish more easily: only the lowest succeed in maintaining their
apparent imperishableness. The former are seldom attained, and maintain
their superior position with difficulty, the latter are compensated
by great fruitfulness.—In the human race, also, thesuperior
specimens,the happy cases of evolution, are the first to perish amid
the fluctuations of chances for and against them. They are exposed to
every form of decadence: they are extreme, and, on that account alone,
already decadents.... The short duration of beauty, of genius, of the
Cæsar, issui generis:such things are not hereditary. Thetypeis
inherited, there is nothing extreme or particularly "happy" about a
type——It is not a case of a particular fate, or of the "evil will" of
Nature, but merely of the concept "superior type": the higher type is
an example of an incomparably greater degree of complexity a greater
sum of co-ordinated elements: but on this account disintegration
becomes a thousand times morethreatening. "Genius" is the sublimest
machine in existence—hence it is the most fragile.Third propositio:: The domestication (culture) of man does not
sink very deep. When it does sink far below the skin it immediately
becomes degeneration (type: the Christian). The wild man (or, in moral
terminology, theevilman) is a reversion to Nature—and, in a
certain sense, he represents a recovery, acurefrom the effects of
"culture." ...685.Anti-Darwin.—What surprises me most on making a general survey of
the great destinies of man, is that I invariably see the reverse of
what to-day Darwin and his school sees orwillpersist in seeing:
selection in favour of the stronger, the better-constituted, and the
progress of the species. Precisely the reverse of this stares one in
the face: the suppression of the lucky cases, the uselessness of the
more highly constituted types, the inevitable mastery of the mediocre,
and even of those who arebelow mediocrity.Unless we are shown some
reason why man is an exception among living creatures, I incline to the
belief that Darwin's school is everywhere at fault. That will to power,
in which I perceive the ultimate reason and character of all change,
explains why it is that selection is never in favour of the exceptions
and of the lucky cases: the strongest and happiest natures are weak
when they are confronted with a majority ruled by organised gregarious
instincts and thefear which possesses the weak. My general view of
the world of values shows that in the highest values which now sway the
destiny of man, the happy cases among men, the select specimens do not
prevail: but rather the decadent specimens,—perhaps there is nothing
more interesting in the world than thisunpleasantspectacle....Strange as it may seem, the strong always have to be upheld against the
weak; and the well-constituted against the ill-constituted, the healthy
against the sick and physiologically botched. If we drew our morals
from reality, they would read thus: the mediocre are more valuable than
the exceptional creatures, and the decadent than the mediocre; the
will to nonentity prevails over the will to life—and the general aim
now is, in Christian, Buddhistic, Schopenhauerian phraseology: "It is
better not to be than to be."Iprotestagainst this formulating of reality into a moral: and I
loathe Christianity with a deadly loathing, because it created sublime
words and attitudes in order to deck a revolting truth with all the
tawdriness of justice, virtue, and godliness....I see all philosophers and the whole of science on their knees before a
reality which is the reverse of "the struggle for life," as Darwin and
his school understood it—that is to say, wherever I look, I see those
prevailing and surviving, who throw doubt and suspicion upon life and
the value of life.—The error of the Darwinian school became a problem
to me: how can one be so blind as to makethismistake?Thatspeciesshow an ascending tendency, is the most nonsensical
assertion that has ever been made: until now they have only manifested
a dead level. There is nothing whatever to prove that the higher
organisms have developed from the lower. I see that the lower, owing to
their numerical strength, their craft, and ruse, now preponderate,—and
I fail to see an instance in which an accidental change produces
an advantage, at least not for a very long period: for it would be
necessary to find some reason why an accidental change should become so
very strong.I do indeed find the "cruelty of Nature" which is so often referred
to; but in a different place: Nature is cruel, but against her lucky
and well-constituted children; she protects and shelters and loves the
lowly.In short, the increase of a species' power, as the result of the
preponderance of its particularly well-constituted and strong
specimens, is perhaps less of a certainty than that it is the result of
the preponderance of its mediocre and lower specimens ... in the case
of the latter, we find great fruitfulness and permanence: in the case
of the former, the besetting dangers are greater, waste is more rapid,
and decimation is more speedy.686.Man as he has appeared up to the present is the embryo of the man
of the future;allthe formative powers which are to produce the
latter, already lie in the former: and owing to the fact thatthey are
enormous, the morepromising for the futurethe modern individual
happens to be, the moresufferingfalls to his lot. This is the
profoundest concept ofsuffering.The formative powers clash.—The
isolation of the individual need not deceive one—as a matter of fact,
some uninterrupted current does actually flow through all individuals,
and does thus unite them. The fact that they feel themselves isolated,
is themost powerful spurin the process of setting themselves the
loftiest of aims: their search for happiness is the means which keeps
together and moderates the formative powers, and keeps them from being
mutually destructive.687.Excessive intellectualstrength setsitselfnew goals; it is not in
the least satisfied by the command and the leadership of the inferior
world, or by the preservation of the organism, of the "individual."We aremorethan the individual: we are the whole chain itself, with
the tasks of all the possible futures of that chain in us.3. Theory of the Will to Power and of Valuations.688.The unitary view of psychology.—We are accustomed to regard the
development of a vast number of forms as compatible with one single
origin.My theory would be: that the will to poweris the primitive motive
force out of which all other motives have been derived;That it is exceedingly illuminating to substitutepowerfor
individual "happiness" (after which every living organism is said to
strive): "It strives after power, aftermorepower";—happiness is
only a symptom of the feeling of power attained, a consciousness of
difference (it does not strive after happiness: but happiness steps
in when the object is attained, after which the organism has striven:
happiness is an accompanying, not an actuating factor);That all motive force is the will to power; that there is no other
force, either physical, dynamic, or psychic.In our science, where the concept cause and effect is reduced to a
relationship of complete equilibrium, and in which it seems desirable
for thesamequantum of force to be found on either side,all idea
of a motive power is absent: we only apprehend results, and we call
these equal from the point of view of their content of force....It is a matter of mere experience that change never ceases: at bottom
we have not the smallest grounds for assuming that any one particular
change must follow upon any other. On the contrary, any state which
has been attained would seem almost forced to maintain itself intact
if it had not within itself a capacity for not desiring to maintain
itself.... Spinoza's proposition concerning "self-preservation" ought
as a matter of fact to put a stop to change. But the proposition is
false; the contrary is true. In all living organisms it canbe clearly
shown that they do everything not to remain as they are, but to become
greater....689."Will to power" and causality.—From a psychological point of view
the idea of "cause" is our feeling of power in the act which is called
willing—our concept effect is the superstition that this feeling of
power is itself the force which moves things....A state which accompanies an event and is already an effect of
that event is deemed "sufficient cause" of the latter; the tense
relationship of our feeling of power (pleasure as the feeling of power)
and of an obstacle being overcome—are these things illusions?If we translate the notion "cause" back into the only sphere which is
known to us, and out of which we have taken it, we cannot imagineany
changein which the will to power is not inherent. We do not know how
to account for any change which is not atrespassingof one power on
another.Mechanics only show us the results, and then only in images (movement
is a figure of speech); gravitation itself has no mechanical cause,
because it is itself the first cause of mechanical results.The will toaccumulate forceis confined to the phenomenon of life,
to nourishment, to procreation, to inheritance, to society, states,
customs, authority. Should we not be allowed to assume that this will
is the motive power also of chemistry?—and of the cosmic order?Not only conservation of energy, but the minimum amount of waste; so
that the only reality isthis:the will of every centre of power to
become stronger—not self-preservation, but the desire to appropriate,
to become master, to become more, to become stronger.Is the fact that science is possible a proof of the principle of
causation—"From like causes, like effects"—"A permanent law of
things"—"Invariable order"? Because something is calculable, is it
therefore on that account necessary?If something happens thus, and thus only, it is not the manifestation
of a "principle," of a "law," of "order." What happens is that certain
quanta of power begin to operate, and their essence is to exercise
their power over all other quanta of power. Can we assume the existence
of a striving after power without a feeling of pleasure and pain,i.e.without the sensation of an increase or a decrease of power?
Is mechanism only a language of signs for the concealed fact of a
world of fighting and conquering quanta of will-power? All mechanical
first-principles, matter, atoms, weight, pressure, and repulsion, are
not facts in themselves, but interpretations arrived at with the help
of psychical fictions.Life, which is our best known form of being, is altogether "will to
the accumulation of strength"—all the processes of life hinge on
this: everything aims, not at preservation, but at accretion and
accumulation. Life as an individual case (a hypothesis which may be
applied to existence in general) strives after the maximum feeling
of power; life is essentially a striving after more power; striving
itself is only a straining after more power;the most fundamental
and innermost thing of all is this will. (Mechanism is merely the
semeiotics of the results.)690.The thing which is the cause of the existence of development cannot
in the course of investigation be found above development; it should
neither be regarded as "evolving" nor as evolved ... the "will to
power" cannot have been evolved.691.What is the relation of the whole of the organic process towards the
rest of nature?—Here the fundamental will reveals itself.692.Is the "will to power" a kind of will, or is it identical with the
concept will? Is it equivalent to desiring or commanding; is it the
will which Schopenhauer says is the essence of things?My proposition is that the will of psychologists hitherto has been an
unjustifiable generalisation, and that there is no such thing as this
sort of will, that instead of the development of one will into several
forms being taken as a fact, the character of will has been cancelled
owing to the fact that its content, its "whither," was subtracted from
it: in Schopenhauer this is so in the highest degree; what he calls
"will" is merely an empty word. There is even less plausibility in
the will to live: for life is simply one of the manifestations of the
will to power; it is quite arbitrary and ridiculousto suggest that
everything is striving to enter into this particular form of the will
to power.693.If the innermost essence of existence is the will to power; if
happiness is every increase of power, and unhappiness the feeling of
not being able to resist, of not being able to become master: may
we not then postulate happiness and pain as cardinal facts? Is will
possible without these two oscillations of yea and nay? But who feels
happiness? ... Who will have power? ... Nonsensical question! If the
essence of all things is itself will to power, and consequently the
ability to feel pleasure and pain! Albeit: contrasts and obstacles are
necessary, therefore also, relatively, units which trespass on one
another.694.According to the obstacles which a force seeks with a view of
overcoming them, the measure of the failure and the fatality thus
provoked must increase, and in so far as every force can only manifest
itself against some thing that opposes it, an element of unhappiness is
necessarily inherent in every action. But this pain acts as a greater
incitement to life, and increases the will to power.695.If pleasure and pain are related to the feeling of power, life would
have to represent such an increase in power that the difference, the
"plus,"would have to enter consciousness. A dead level of power,
if maintained, would have to measure its happiness in relation
to depreciations of that level,i.e.in relation to states of
unhappiness and not of happiness.... The will to an increase lies
in the essence of happiness: that power is enhanced, and that this
difference becomes conscious.In a state of decadence after a certain time the opposite difference
becomes conscious, that is decrease: the memory of former strong
moments depresses the present feelings of happiness in this state
comparison reduces happiness.696.It is not the satisfaction of the will which is the cause of happiness
(to this superficial theory I am more particularly opposed—this absurd
psychological forgery in regard to the most simple things), but it is
that the will is always striving to overcome that which stands in its
way. The feeling of happiness lies precisely in the discontentedness of
the will, in the fact that without opponents and obstacles it is never
satisfied. "The happy man": a gregarious ideal.697.The normal discontent of our instincts—for instance, of the instinct
of hunger, of sex, of movement—contains nothing which is in itself
depressing; it rather provokes the feeling of life, and, whatever the
pessimists may say to us, like allthe rhythms of small and irritating
stimuli, it strengthens. Instead of this discontent making us sick of
life, it is rather the great stimulus to life.(Pleasure might even perhaps be characterised as the rhythm of small
and painful stimuli.)698.Kant says: "These lines of Count Verri's (Sull' indole del piacere
e del dolore;1781) I confirm with absolute certainty: 'Il solo
principio motore dell' uomo è il dolore. Il dolore precede ogni
piacere. Il piacere non è un essere positivo.'"[5]