[4]Cf. Disraeli inTancred:"Self-respect, too, is a
superstition of past ages.... It is not suited to these times; it
is much too arrogant, too self-conceited, too egoistical. No one is
important enough to have self-respect nowadays" (book iii. chap.
v.).—Tr.920."I will have this or that"; "I would that this or that were so"; "I
know that this or that is so the degrees of power: the man ofwill,the man ofdesire,the man offate.921.The means by which a strong species maintains itself:—It grants itself the right of exceptional actions, as a test of the
power of self-control and of freedom.It abandons itself to states in which a man is not allowed to be
anything else than a barbarian.It tries to acquire strength of will by every kind of asceticism.It is not expansive, it practises silence; it is cautious in regard to
all charms.It learns to obey in such a way that obedience provides a test of
self-maintenance. Casuistry is carried to its highest pitch in regard
to points of honour.It never argues, "What is sauce for the goose is sauce for the
gander,"—but conversely! it regards reward, and the ability to repay,
as a privilege, as a distinction.It does not covetotherpeople's virtues.922.The way in which one has to treat raw savages and the impossibility of
dispensing with barbarous methods, becomes obvious, in practice, when
one is transplanted, with all one's European pampering, to a spot such
as the Congo, or anywhere else where it is necessary to maintain one's
mastery over barbarians.923.Warlike and peaceful people.—Art thou a man who has the instincts of
a warrior in thy blood? If this be so, another question must be put. Do
thy instincts impel thee to attack or to defend? The rest of mankind,
all those whose instincts are not warlike, desire peace, concord,
freedom, "equal rights": these things are but names and steps for one
and the same thing. Such men only wish to go where it is not necessary
for them to defend themselves,—such men become discontented with
themselves when they are obliged to offer resistance: they would fain
create circumstances in which war is no longer necessary. If the worst
came to the worst, they would resign themselves, obey, and submit: all
these things are better than waging war—thus does the Christian's
instinct, for instance, whisper to him. In the born warrior's
character there is something of armour, likewise in the choice of his
circumstances and in the development of every one of his qualities,
weapons are best evolved by the latter type, shields are best devised
by the former.What expedients and what virtues do the unarmed and the undefended
require in order to survive—and even to conquer?924.What will become of a man who no longer has any reasons for either
defence or attack? What will remain of hispassionswhen he has lost
those which form his defence and his weapons?925.A marginal note to aniaiserie anglaise: "Do not to others that
which you would not that they should do unto you." This stands for
wisdom; this stands for prudence; this stands as the very basis of
morality as "a golden maxim." John Stuart Mill believes in it (and what
Englishman does not?).... But the maxim does not bear investigation.
The argument, Do not as you would not be done by, forbids action
which produce harmful results; the thought behind always is that an
action is invariably requited. What if some one came forward with the"Principe"in his hands, and said: "We must do those actions alone
which enable us to steal a march on others,—and which deprive others
of the power of doing the same to us"?—On the other hand, let us
remember the Corsican who pledges his honour to vendetta. He too does
not desire to have a bullet through him; but the prospect of one, the
probability of getting one, does not deter him fromvindicating his
honour.... And in all really decent actions are we not intentionally
indifferent as to what result they will bring? To avoid an action which
might have harmful results,—that would be tantamount to forbidding all
decent actions in general.Apart from this, the above maxim is valuable because it betrays a
certaintype of man: it is the instinct of the herd which formulates
itself through him,—we are equal, we regard each other as equal: as
I am to thee so art thou to me.—In this community equivalence of
actions is really believed in—an equivalence which never under any
circumstances manifests itself in real conditions. It is impossible
to requite every action: among real individuals equal actions do not
exist, consequently there can be no such thing as "requital." ... When
I do anything, I am very far from thinking that any man is able to do
anything at all like it: the action belongs to me.... Nobody can pay
me back for anything I do; the most that can be done is to make me the
victim of another action.926.Against John Stuart Mill.—I abhor the man's vulgarity when he says:
"What is right for one man is right for another"; "Do not to others
that which you would not that they should do unto you. Such principles
would fain establish the whole of human trafficupon mutual services,so that every action would appear to be a cash payment for something
done to us. The hypothesishere is ignoble to the last degree: it
is taken for granted that there is some sort of equivalence in value
between my actions and thine; the most personal value Of an action is
simply cancelled in this manner (that part of an action which has no
equivalent and which cannot be remunerated). "Reciprocity" is a piece
of egregious vulgarity; the mere fact that what I docannotandmaynot be done by another, that there isno such thing as equivalence(except in thosevery select circleswhere one actually has one's
equal,inter pares), that in a really profound sense a man never
requites because he is somethinguniquein himself and can only douniquethings,—this fundamental conviction contains the cause ofaristocratic aloofness from the mob, because the latter believes in
equality, andconsequentlyin the feasibility of equivalence and
"reciprocity."927.The suburban Philistinism of moral valuations and of its concepts
"useful" and "harmful" is well founded; it is the necessary point of
view of a community which is only able to see and surveyimmediate
and proximateconsequences. TheStateand thepolitical manare
already in need of a moresuper-moralattitude of mind: because
they have to calculate concerning a much more complicated tissue
of consequences. An economic policy for the whole world should be
possible which could look at things in such broad perspective that all
its isolated demands would seem for the moment not only unjust, but
arbitrary.928."Should one follow one's feelings?"—To set one's life at stake on
the impulse of the moment, and actuated by a generous feeling, has
little worth, and does not even distinguish one. Everybody is alike in
being capable of this—and in behaving in this way with determination,
the criminal, the bandit, and the Corsican certainly outstrip the
honest man.A higher degree of excellence would be to overcome this impulse, and to
refrain from performing an heroic deed at its bidding—and to remain
cold,raisonnable, free from the tempestuous surging of concomitant
sensations of delight.... The same holds good of pity: it must first besifted throughreason; without this it becomes just as dangerous as
any other passion.Theblind yieldingto a passion, whether it be generosity, pity, or
hostility, is the cause of the greatest evil. Greatness of character
does not consist in not possessing these passions—on the contrary, a
man should possess them to a terrible degree: but he should lead them
by the bridle.. and even this he should not do out of love of control,
but merely because....929."To give up one's life for a cause"—very effective. But there are many
things for which one gives up one's life: the passions, one and all,
will be gratified. Whether one's life be pledged to pity, to anger,
or to revenge—it matters not fromthe point of view of value. How
many have not sacrificed their lives for pretty girls—and even what
is worse, their health! When one has temperament, one instinctively
chooses the most dangerous things: if one is a philosopher, for
instance, one chooses the adventures of speculation; if one is
virtuous, one chooses immorality. One kind of man will risk nothing,
another kind will risk everything. Are we despisers of life? On the
contrary, what we seek is life raised to a higher power, life in
danger.... But, let me repeat, we do not, on that account, wish to
be more virtuous than others, Pascal, for instance, wished to risk
nothing, and remained a Christian. That perhaps was virtuous.——A man
always sacrifices something.930.How manyadvantagesdoes not a man sacrifice! To how small an extent
does he seek his own profit! All his emotions and passions wish to
assert their rights, and how remote a passion is From that cautious
utility which consists in personal profit!A man doesnotstrive after "happiness"; one must be an Englishman to
be able to believe that a man is always seeking his own advantage. Our
desires long to violate things with passion—their overflowing strength
seeks obstacles.931.All passions are generallyuseful,some directly, others indirectly;
in regard to utility it is absolutelyimpossible to fix upon any
gradation of values,—however certainly the forces of nature in general
may be regarded as good (i.e.useful), from an economic point of
view, they are still the sources of much that is terrible and much
that is fatally irrevocable. The most one might say would be, that
the mightiest passions are the most valuable: seeing that no stronger
sources of power exist.932.All well-meaning, helpful, good-natured attitudes of mind havenotcome to be honoured on account of their usefulness: but because they
are the conditions peculiar torich soulswho are able to bestow
and whose value consists in their vital exuberance. Look into the
eyes of the benevolent man! In them you will see the exact reverse of
self-denial, of hatred of self, of Pascalism.933.In short,what we require is to dominate the passions and not to
weaken or to extirpate them!—The greater the dominating power of the
will, the greater the freedom that may be given to the passions.The "great man" is so, owing to the free scope which he gives to his
desires, and to the still greater power which knows how to enlist these
magnificent monsters into its service.The "good man" in every stage of civilisation is at one and the same
time theleast dangerousand themost useful:a sort of medium;
the idea formed of such a man by the common mind is that he is some
onewhom one has no reason to fear, but whom one must not therefore
despise.Education: essentially a means ofruiningexceptions in favour of the
rule. Culture: essentially the means of directing taste against the
exceptions in favour of the mediocre.Only when a culture can dispose of an overflow of force, is it capable
of being a hothouse for the luxurious culture of the exception, of the
experiment, of the danger, of thenuance: thisis the tendency ofeveryaristocratic culture.934.All questions of strength: to what extent ought one to try and
prevail against the preservative measures of society and the latter's
prejudices?—to what extent ought one to unfetterone's terrible
qualities,through which so many go to the dogs?—to what extent
ought one to run counter totruth,and take up sides with its most
questionable aspects?—to what extent ought one to oppose suffering,
self-contempt, pity, disease, vice, when it is always open to question
whether one can ever master them (what does not kill us makes usstronger....)?—and, finally, to what extent ought one to acknowledge
the rights of the rule, of the common-place, of the petty, of the good,
of the upright, in fact of the average man, without thereby allowing
one's self to become vulgar? ... The strongest test of character is to
resist beingruined by the seductiveness of goodness.Goodnessmust
be regarded as a luxury, as a refinement, as avice.3. The Noble Man.935.Type.real goodness, nobility, greatness of soul, as the result of
vital wealth: which does not give in order to receive—and which has no
desire toelevateitself by being good,squanderingis typical of
genuine goodness, vitalpersonalwealth is its prerequisite.936.Aristocracy.—Gregarious ideals at present culminating in the highest
standard of value for society. It has been attempted to give them a
cosmic, yea, and even a metaphysical, value.—I defendaristocracyagainst them.Any society which would of itself preserve a feeling of respect
anddélicatessein regard to freedom, must consider itself as an
exception, and have a force against it from which it distinguishes
itself, and upon which it looks down with hostility.The more rights I surrender and the more I level myself down to others,
the more deeply do I sink into the average and ultimately into the
greatest number. The first condition which an aristocratic society
must have in order to maintain a high degree of freedom among its
members, is that extreme tension which arises from the presenceof
the mostantagonisticinstincts in all its units: from their will to
dominate....If ye would fain do away with strong contrasts and differences of rank,
ye will also abolish, strong love, lofty attitudes of mind, and the
feeling of individuality.***Concerning theactualpsychology of societies based upon freedom and
equality.—What is it that tends todiminishin such a society?The will to beresponsible for ones self(the loss of this is a sign
of the decline of autonomy); the ability to defend and to attack, even
in spiritual matters; the power of command; the sense of reverence,
of subservience, the ability to be silent,great passion,great
achievements, tragedy and cheerfulness.937.In 1814 Augustin Thierry read what Montlosier had said in his work,De
la Monarchie française:he answered with a cry of indignation, and set
himself to his task. That emigrant had said:"Race d'affranchis, race d'esclaves arrachés de nos mains, peuple
tributaire, peuple nouveau, licence vous fut octroyée d'être libres,
et non pas à nous d'être nobles; pour nous tout est de droit, pour
vous tout est de grâce, nous ne sommes point de votre communauté; nous
sommes un tout par nous mêmes."938.How constantly the aristocratic world shears and weakens itself ever
more and more! Bymeans of its noble instincts it abandons its
privileges, and owing to its refined and excessive culture, it takes
an interest in the people, the weak, the poor, and the poetry of the
lowly, etc.939.There is such a thing as a noble and dangerous form of carelessness,
which allows of profound conclusions and insight: the carelessness
of the self-reliant and over-rich soul, which has nevertroubleditself about friends, but which knows only hospitality and knows
how to practise it; whose heart and house are open to all who will
enter—beggar, cripple, or king. This is genuine sociability: he who is
capable of it has hundreds of "friends," but probably not one friend.940.The teaching μηδὲν ἄγαν applies to men with overflowing
strength,—not to the mediocre, ἐγκράτεια and ἄσκησις are only
steps to higher things. Above them stands "golden Nature.""Thou shalt"—unconditional obedience in Stoics, in Christian and
Arabian Orders, in Kant's philosophy (it is immaterial whether this
obedience is shown to a superior or to a concept).Higher than "Thou shalt" stands "I will" (the heroes); higher than "I
will" stands "I am" (the gods of the Greeks).Barbarian gods express nothing of the pleasure of restraint,—they are
neither simple, nor light-hearted, nor moderate.941.The essence of our gardens and palaces (and to the same extent the
essence of all yearning after riches) isthe desire to rid the eye of
disorder and vulgarity, and to build a home for our soul's nobility.The majority of people certainly believe that they will develop higher
natures when those beautiful and peaceful things have operated upon
them: hence the exodus to Italy, hence all travelling, etc., and all
reading and visits to theatres.People want to be formed—that is the
kernel of their labours for culture! But the strong, the mighty, would
themselveshave a hand in the forming, and would fain have nothing
strange about them!It is for this reason, too, that men go to open Nature, not to find
themselves, but to lose themselves and to forget themselves. The desire
"to get away from one's self" is proper to all weaklings, and to all
those who are discontented with themselves.942.The only nobility is that of birth and blood. (I do not refer here to
the prefix "Lord" andL'almanac de Gotha: this is a parenthesis for
donkeys.) Wherever people speak of the "aristocracy of intellect,"
reasons are generally not lacking for concealing something, it is
known to be a password among ambitious Jews. Intellect alone does
not ennoble; on the contrary, something is always neededto ennoble
intellect.—What then is needed?—Blood.943.What is noble?—External punctiliousness; because this punctiliousness hedges a man
about, keeps him at a distance, saves him from being confounded with
somebody else.A frivolous appearance in word, clothing, and bearing, with which
stoical hardness and self-control protect themselves from all prying
inquisitiveness or curiosity.—A slow step and a slow glance. There are not too many valuable things
on earth: and these come and wish to come of themselves to him who has
value. We are not quick to admire.—We know how to bear poverty, want, and even illness.—We avoid small honours owing to our mistrust of all who are
over-ready to praise: for the man who praises believes he understands
what he praises: but to understand—Balzac, that typical man of
ambition, betrayed the factcomprendre c'est égaler.—Our doubt concerning the communicativeness of our hearts goes very
deep; to us, loneliness is not a matter of choice, it is imposed upon
us.—We are convinced that we only have duties to our equals, to others we
do as we think best: we know that justice is only to be expected among
equals (alas! this will not be realised for some time to come),—We are ironical towards the "gifted"; we hold the belief that no
morality is possible without good birth.—We always feel as if we were those who had to dispense honours: while
he is not found too frequently who would be worthy of honouring us.—We are always disguised: the higher a man's nature the more is he
in need of remaining incognito. If there be a God, then out of sheer
decency He ought only to show Himself on earth in the form of a man.—We are capable ofotium,of the unconditional conviction that
although a handicraft does not shame one in any sense, it certainly
reduces one's rank. However much we may respect "industry," and know
how to give it its due, we do not appreciate it in a bourgeois sense,
or after the manner of those insatiable and cackling artists who, like
hens, cackle and lay eggs, and cackle again.—We protect artists and poets and any one who happens to be a master
in something; but as creatures of a higher order than those, who only
know how to do something, who are only "productive men," we do not
confound ourselves with them.—We find joy in allformsand ceremonies; we would fain foster
everything formal, and we are convinced that courtesy is one of the
greatest virtues; we feel suspicious of every kind oflaisser aller,including the freedom of the press and of thought; because, under such
conditions, the intellect grows easy-going and coarse, and stretches
its limbs.—We take pleasure in women as in a perhaps daintier, more delicate,
and more ethereal kind of creature. What a treat it is to meet
creatureswho have only dancing and nonsense and finery in their
minds! They have always been the delight of every tense and profound
male soul, whose life is burdened with heavy responsibilities.—We take pleasure in princes and in priests, because in big things, as
in small, they actually uphold the belief in the difference of human
values, even in the estimation of the past, and at least symbolically.—We are able to keep silenceibut we do not breathe a word of this
in the presence of listeners.—We are able to endure long enmities: we lack the power of easy
reconciliations.—We have a loathing of demagogism, of enlightenment, of amiability,
and plebeian familiarity.—We collect precious things, the needs of higher and fastidious souls;
we wish to possess nothing in common. We want to have our own books,
ourownlandscapes.—We protest against evil and fine experiences, and take care not to
generalise too quickly. The individual case: how ironically we regard
it when it has the bad taste to put on the airs of a rule!—We love that which isnaïf,andnaïfpeople, but as spectators
and higher creatures; we think Faust is just as simple as his Margaret.—We have a low estimation of good people, because they are gregarious
animals: we know how often an invaluable golden drop of goodness
lies concealed beneath the most evil, the most malicious, and the
hardest exterior, and that this single grain outweighs all the mere
goody-goodiness of milk-and-watery souls.—We don't regard a man of our kind as refuted by his vices, nor by his
tomfooleries. We are well aware that we are not recognised with ease,
and that we have every reason to make our foreground very prominent.944.What is noble?—The fact that one is constantly forced to be playing
a part. That one is constantly searching for situations in which one
is forced to put on airs. That one leaves happiness to thegreatest
number:the happiness which consists of inner peacefulness, of virtue,
of comfort, and of Anglo-angelic-back-parlour-smugness,à laSpencer.
That one instinctively seeks for heavy responsibilities. That one knows
how to create enemies everywhere, at a pinch even in one's self. That
one contradicts thegreatest number,not in words at all, but by
continually behaving differently from them.945.Virtue (for instance, truthfulness) isourmost noble and most
dangerous luxury. We must not decline the disadvantages which it brings
in its train.946.We refuse to bepraised:we do what serves our purpose, what gives us
pleasure, or what we are obliged to do.947.What is chastity in a man? It means that his taste in sex has remained
noble; thatin eroticishe likes neither the brutal, the morbid, nor
the clever.948.The concept of honour is founded upon the belief in select society,
in knightly excellences, in the obligation of having continually to
play a part. In essentials it means that one does not take one's life
too seriously, that one adheres unconditionally to the most dignified
manners in one's dealings with everybody (at least in so far as they do
not belong to "us"); that one is neither familiar, nor good-natured,
nor hearty, nor modest, exceptinter pares; that one isalways
playing a part.949.The fact that one sets one's life, one's health, and one's honour
at stake, is the result of high spirits and of an overflowing and
spendthrift will: it is not the result of philanthropy, but of the fact
that every danger kindles our curiosity concerning the measure of our
strength, and provokes our courage.950.Eagles swoop down straight nobility of soul is best revealed by the
magnificent and proud foolishness with which it makes itsattacks.951.War should be made against all namby-pamby ideas ofnobility!—A
certain modicum of brutalitycannot be dispensed with: no more
than we can do without a certain approximation to criminality.
"Self-satisfaction" mustnotbe allowed; a man should look upon
himself with an adventurous spirit; he should experiment with himself
and run risks with himself—no beautiful soul-quackery should be
tolerated. I want to givea more robust ideala chance of prevailing.952."Paradise is under the shadow of a swordsman"—this is also a symbol
and a test-word by which souls with noble and warrior-like origin
betray and discover themselves.953.The two paths.—There comes a period when man has a surplus amount
of power at his disposal. Science aims at establishing theslavery of
nature.Then man acquires theleisurein which to develop himself into
something new and more lofty.A new aristocracy.It is then that a
large number of virtues which are nowconditions of existenceare
superseded.—Qualities which are no longer needed are on that account
lost. We no longer need virtues:consequentlywe are losing them
(likewise the morality of "one thing is needful," of the salvation of
the soul, and of immortality: these were means wherewith to make man
capable of enormous self-tyranny, through the emotion of great fear!!!).The different kinds of needs by means of whosediscipline man is
formed: need teaches work, thought, and self-control.***Physiologicalpurification and strengthening. The new aristocracy is
in need of an opposing body which it may combat: it must be driven to
extremities in order to maintain itself.The two futures of mankind: (1) the consequence of a levelling-down
to mediocrity, (2) conscious aloofness and self-development.A doctrine which would cleave agulf:it maintains thehighest and
the lowest species(it destroys the intermediate).The aristocracies, both spiritual and temporal, which have existed
hitherto prove nothingagainstthe necessity of a new aristocracy.4. The Lords of the Earth.954.A certain question constantly recurs to us; it is perhaps a seductive
and evil question; may it be whispered into the ears of those who
have a right to such doubtful problems—those strong souls of to-day
whose dominion over themselves is unswerving: is it not high time,
now that the type "gregarious animal" is developing ever more and
more in Europe, to set about rearing, thoroughly, artificially, and
consciously, an opposite type, and to attempt to establish the latter's
virtues? And would not the democratic movement itself find forthe
first time a sort of goal, salvation, and justification, if some one
appeared who availed himself of it—so that at last, beside its new
and sublime product, slavery (for this must be the end of European
democracy), that higher species of ruling and Cæsarian spirits might
also be produced, which would stand upon it, hold to it, and would
elevate themselves through it? This new race would climb aloft to new
and hitherto impossible things, to a broader vision, and to its task on
earth.955.The aspect of the European of to-day makes me very hopeful. A daring
and ruling race is here building itself up upon the foundation of
an extremely intelligent, gregarious mass. It is obvious that the
educational movements for the latter are not alone prominent nowadays.956.The same conditions which go to develop the gregarious animal also
force the development of the leaders.957.The question, and at the same time the task, is approaching with
hesitation, terrible as Fate, but nevertheless inevitable: how shall
the earth as a whole be ruled? And to what end shall man as a whole—no
longer as a people or as a race—be reared and trained?Legislative moralities are the principal meansby which one can form
mankind, according to the fancy of a creative and profound will:
provided, of course, that such an artistic will of the first order gets
the power into its own hands, and can make its creative will prevail
over long periods in the form of legislation, religions, and morals.
At present, and probably for some time to come, one will seek such
colossally creative men, such really great men, as I understand them,
in vain: they will be lacking, until, after many disappointments, we
are forced to begin to understand why it is they are lacking, and that
nothing bars with greater hostility their rise and development, at
present and for some time to come, than that which is now calledthemorality in Europe. Just as if there were no other kind of morality,
and could be no other kind, than the one we have already characterised
as herd-morality. It is this morality which is now striving with
all its power to attain to that green-meadow happiness on earth,
which consists in security, absence of danger, ease, facilities for
livelihood, and, last but not least, "if all goes well," even hopes
to dispense with all kinds of shepherds and bell-wethers. The two
doctrines which it preaches most universally are "equality of rights"
and "pity for all sufferers"—and it even regards suffering itself as
something which must be got rid of absolutely. That such ideas may be
modern leads one to think very poorly of modernity. He, however, who
has reflected deeply concerning the question, how and where the plant
man has hitherto grown most vigorously, is forced to believe that this
hasalways taken place under the opposite conditions; that to this end
the danger of the situation has to increase enormously, his inventive
faculty and dissembling powers have to fight their way up under long
oppression and compulsion, and his will to life has to be increased
to the unconditioned will to power, to over-power: he believes that
danger, severity, violence, peril in the street and in the heart,
inequality of rights, secrecy, stoicism, seductive art, and devilry of
every kind—in short, the opposite of all gregarious desiderata—are
necessary for the elevation of man. Such a morality with opposite
designs, which would rear man upwards instead of to comfort and
mediocrity; such a morality, with the intention of producing a ruling
caste—the future lords of the earth—must, in order to be taught at
all, introduce itself as if it were in some way correlated to the
prevailing moral law, and must come forward under the cover of the
latter's words and forms. But seeing that, to this end, a host of
transitionary and deceptive measures must be discovered, and that the
life of a single individual stands for almost nothing in view of the
accomplishment of such lengthy tasks and aims, the first thing that
must be done is to reara new kindof man in whom the duration of
the necessary will and the necessary instincts is guaranteed for many
generations. This must be a new kind of ruling species and caste—this
ought to be quite as clear as the somewhat lengthy and not easily
expressed consequences of this thought. The aim should be to prepare
atransvaluation of valuesfor a particularly strong kind ofman,
most highly gifted in intellect and will, and, to this end, slowly
and cautiously to liberate in him a whole host of slandered instincts
hitherto held in check: whoever meditates about this problem belongs
to us, the free spirits—certainly not to that kind of "free spirit"
which has existed hitherto: for these desired practically the reverse.
To this order, it seems to me, belong, above all, the pessimists of
Europe, the poets and thinkers of a revolted idealism, in so far as
their discontent with existence in general mustconsistentlyat least
have led them to be dissatisfied with the man of the present; the same
applies to certain insatiably ambitious artists who courageously and
unconditionally fight against the gregarious animal for the special
rights of higher men, and subdue all herd-instincts and precautions
of more exceptional minds by their seductive art. Thirdly and lastly,
we should include in this group all those critics and historians by
whom the discovery of the Old World, which has begun so happily—this
was the work of thenewColumbus, of German intellect—will be
courageouslycontinued(for we still stand in the very first stages
of this conquest). For in the Old World, as a matter of fact, a
different and more lordly morality ruled than that of to-day; and the
man of antiquity, under the educational ban of his morality, was a
stronger and deeper man than the man of to-day—up to the present he
has been the only well-constituted man. The temptation, however, which
from antiquity to the present day has always exercised its power on
such luckystrokes of Nature,i.e.on strong and enterprising souls,
is, even at the present day, the most subtle and most effective of
anti-democratic and anti-Christian powers, just as it was in the time
of the Renaissance.958.I am writing for a race of men which does not yet exist: for "the lords
of the earth."In Plato'sTheagesthe following passage will be found: "Every one
of us would like if possible to be master of mankind; if possible, aGod!" Thisattitude of mind must be reinstated in our midst.Englishmen, Americans, and Russians.959.That primeval forest-plant Man always appears where the struggle for
power has been waged longest.Greatmen.Primeval forest creatures, theRomans.960.From now henceforward there will be such favourable first conditions
for greater ruling powers as have never yet been found on earth.
And this is by no means the most important point. The establishment
has been made possible of international race unions which will set
themselves the task of rearing a ruling race, the future "lords
of the earth"—a new, vast aristocracy based upon the most severe
self-discipline, in which the will of philosophical men of power and
artist-tyrants willbe stamped upon thousands of years: a higher
species of men which, thanks to their preponderance of will, knowledge,
riches, and influence, will avail themselves of democratic Europe as
the most suitable and supple instrument they can have for taking the
fate of the earth into their own hands, and working as artists upon man
himself. Enough! The time is coming for us to transform all our views
on politics.5. The Great Man.961.I will endeavour to see at which periods in history great men arise.
The significance of despotic moralities that have lasted a long time:
they strain the bow, provided they do not break it.962.A great man,—a man whom Nature has built up and invented in a grand
style,—What is such a man?First,in his general course of action
his consistency is so broad that owing to its very breadth it can be
surveyed only with difficulty, and consequently misleads; he possesses
the capacity of extending his will over great stretches of his life,
and of despising and rejecting all small things, whatever most
beautiful and "divine" things of the world there may be among them.Secondly,he iscolder, harder, less cautious and more free from
the fear of "public opinion";he does notpossess the virtues which
are compatible with respectability and with being respected, nor any
of those things which are counted among the "virtues of the herd." If
he is unable tolead, he walks alone; he may then perchance grunt
at many things which he meets on his way.Thirdly, he asks for no
"compassionate" heart, but servants, instruments; in his dealings with
men his one aim isto makesomething out of them. He knows that he
cannot reveal himself to anybody: he thinks it bad taste to become
familiar; and as a rule he is not familiar when people think he is.
When he is not talking to his soul, he wears a mask. He would rather
lie than tell the truth, because lying requires more spirit andwill.
There is a loneliness within his heart which neither praise nor blame
can reach, because he is his own judge from whom is no appeal.963.The great man is necessarily a sceptic (I do not mean to say by this
that he must appear to be one), provided that greatness consists in
this: towillsomething great, together with the means thereto.
Freedom from any kind of conviction is a factor in hisstrength
of will. And thus it is in keeping with that "enlightened form of
despotism" which every great passion exercises. Such a passion enlists
intellect in its service; it even has the courage for unholy means;
it creates without hesitation; it allows itself convictions, it evenusesthem, but it never submitsto them. The need of faith and
of anything unconditionally negative or affirmative is a proof of
weakness; all weakness is weakness of will. The man of faith, the
believer, is necessarily an inferior species of man. From this it
follows that "all freedom of spirit,"i.e.instinctive scepticism, is
the prerequisite of greatness.964.The great man is conscious of his power over a people, and of the fact
that he coincides temporarily with a people or with a century—thismagnifyingof his self-consciousness ascausaandvoluntasismisunderstoodas "altruism": he feels driven tomeansof
communication: all great men areinventivein such means. They want
to form great communities in their own image; they would fain give
multiformity and disorder definite shape; it stimulates them to behold
chaos.The misunderstanding of love. There is aslavishlove which
subordinates itself and gives itself away—which idealises and deceives
itself; there is adivinespecies of love which despises and loves at
the same time, and whichremodelsandelevatesthe thing it loves.The object is to attain that enormousenergy of greatnesswhich can
model the man of the future by means of discipline and also by means
of the annihilation of millions of the bungled and botched, and which
can yet avoidgoing to ruinat the sight of the sufferingcreatedthereby, the like of which has never been seen before.965.The revolution, confusion, and distress of whole peoples is in my
opinion of less importance thanthe misfortunes which attend great
individuals in their development.We must not allow ourselves to be
deceived: the many misfortunes of all these small folk do not together
constitute a sum-total, except in the feelings ofmightymen.—To
think of one's self in moments of great danger, and to draw ones own
advantage from the calamities of thousands in the case of the man
who differs very much from the common ruck—may be a sign of a great
character which is able to master its feeling of pity and justice.966.In contradistinction to the animal, man has developed such a host
ofantagonisticinstincts and impulses in himself, that he has
become master of the earth by means of this synthesis.—Moralities
are only the expression of local and limitedorders of rank inthis
multifarious world of instincts which prevent man from perishing
through theirantagonism.Thus a masterful instinct so weakens and
subtilises the instinct which opposes it that it becomes animpulsewhich provides thestimulusfor the activity of the principal
instinct.The highest man would have the greatest multifariousness in his
instincts, and he wouldpossessthese in the relatively strongest
degree in which he is able to endure them. As a matter of fact,
wherever the plant, man, is found strong,mighty instincts are to be
found opposing each other (e.g.Shakespeare), but they are subdued.967.Would one not be justified in reckoning all great men among thewicked?This is not so easy to demonstrate in the case of
individuals. They are so frequently capable of masterly dissimulation
that they very often assume the airs and forms of great virtues. Often,
too, they seriously reverence virtues, and in such a way as to be
passionately hard towards themselves; but as the result of cruelty.
Seen from a distance such things are liable to deceive. Many, on the
other hand, misunderstand themselves; not infrequently, too, a great
mission will call forth great qualities,e.g.justice. The essential
fact is: the greatest men may also perhaps have great virtues, but then
they also have the opposites of these virtues. I believe that it is
precisely out of the presence of these opposites and of the feelings
they suscitate, that the great man arises,—for the great man is the
broad arch which spans two banks lying far apart.968.Ingreat menwe find the specific qualities of life in their highest
manifestation: injustice, falsehood, exploitation. But inasmuch as
their effect has always beenoverwhelming,their essential nature has
been most thoroughly misunderstood,and interpreted as goodness. The
type of such an interpreter would be Carlyle.[5]