[5]This not only refers toHeroes and Hero-Worship,but doubtless to Carlyle's prodigious misunderstanding of Goethe a
misunderstanding which still requires to be put right by a critic
untainted by Puritanism.—Tr.969.Generally speaking, everythingis worth no more and no less than one
has paid for it.This of course does not hold good in the case of an
isolated individual; the great capacities of the individual have no
relation whatsoever to that which he has done, sacrificed, and suffered
for them. But if one should examine the previous history of his race
one would be sure to find the record of an extraordinary storing up and
capitalising of power by means of all kinds of abstinence, struggle,
industry, and determination. It is because the great man has cost so
much, and not because he stands there as a miracle, as a gift from
heaven, or as an accident, that he became great: "Heredity" is a false
notion. A man's ancestors have always paid the price of what he is.970.The danger of modesty.To adapt ourselves too early to duties,
societies, and daily schemes of work in which accident may have placed
us, at a time when neither our powers nor our aim in life has stepped
peremptorily into our consciousness;the premature certainty of
conscience and feeling of relief and of sociability which is acquired
by this precocious, modest attitude, and which appears to our minds
as a deliverance from those inner and outer disturbances of our
feelings—all this pampers and keeps a man down in the most dangerous
fashion imaginable. To learn to respect things which people about us
respect, as if we had no standard or right of our own to determine
values; the strain of appraising things as others appraise them,counterto the whisperings of our inner taste, which also has a
conscience of its own, becomes a terribly subtle kind of constraint:
and if in the end no explosion takes place which bursts all the bonds
of love and morality at once, then such a spirit becomes withered,
dwarfed, feminine, and objective. The reverse of this is bad enough,
but still it is better than the foregoing: to suffer from one's
environment, from its praise just as much as from its blame; to be
wounded by it and to fester inwardly without betraying the fact; to
defend one's self involuntarily and suspiciously against its love; to
learn to be silent, and perchance to conceal this by talking; to create
nooks and safe, lonely hiding-places where one can go and take breath
for a moment, or shed tears of sublime comfort—until at last one has
grown strong enough to say: "What on earth have I to do with you?" and
to goone'sway alone.971.Those men who are in themselves destinies, and whose advent is the
advent of fate, the whole race ofheroicbearers of burdens: oh!
how heartily and gladly would they have respite from themselves for
once in a while!—how they crave after stout hearts and shoulders, that
they might free themselves, were it but for an hour or two, from that
which oppresses them! And how fruitlessly they crave! ... They wait;
they observe all that passes before their eyes: no man even cometh nigh
to them with a thousandth part of their suffering and passion, no man
guesseth to what end they have waited.... At last, at last, they learn
the first lesson of their life: to wait no longer; and forthwith they
learn their second lesson: to be affable, to be modest; and from that
time onwards to endure everybody and every kind of thing—in short, to
endure still a little more than they had endured theretofore.6. The Highest Man as Lawgiver of the Future.972.The lawgivers of the future.—After having tried for a long time in
vain to attach a particular meaning to the word "philosopher,"—for I
found many antagonistic traits, I recognised that we can distinguish
between two kinds of philosophers:—(1) Those who desire to establish any large system of values (logical
or moral);(2) Those who are thelawgiversof such valuations.The former try to seize upon the world of the present or the past,
by embodying or abbreviatingthe multifarious phenomena by means of
signs: their object is to make it possible for us to survey, to reflect
upon, to comprehend, and to utilise everything that has happened
hitherto—they serve the purpose of man by using all past things to the
benefit of his future.The second class, however, arecommanders;they say: "Thus shall it
be!" They alone determine the "whither" and the "wherefore," and that
which will be useful and beneficial to man; they have command over the
previous work of scientific men, and all knowledge is to them only
a means to their creations. This second kind of philosopher seldom
appears; and as a matter of fact their situation and their danger is
appalling. How often have they not intentionally blindfolded their
eyes in order to shut out the sight of the small strip of ground which
separates them from the abyss and from utter destruction. Plato, for
instance, when he persuaded himself that "the good," as he wanted it,
was not Plato's good, but "the good in itself," the eternal treasure
which a certain man of the name of Plato had chanced to find on his
way! This same will to blindness prevails in a much coarser form in the
case of the founders of religion; their "Thou shalt" must on no account
sound to their ears like "I will,"—they only dare to pursue their task
as if under the command of God; their legislation of values can only be
a burden they can bear if they regard it as "revelation," in this way
their conscience is not crushed by the responsibility.As soon as those two comforting expedients—that of Plato and that of
Muhammed—have been overthrown, and no thinker can any longer relieve
his conscience with the hypothesis "God" or "eternal values," the
claim of the lawgiver to determine new values rises to an awfulness
which has not yet been experienced. Now those elect, on whom the
faint light of such a duty is beginning to dawn, try and see whether
they cannot escape it—as their greatest danger—by means of a timely
side-spring: for instance, they try to persuade themselves that their
task is already accomplished, or that it defies accomplishment, or that
their shoulders are not broad enough for such burdens, or that they
are already taken up with burdens closer to hand, or even that this
new and remote duty is a temptation and a seduction, drawing them away
from all other duties; a disease, a kind of madness. Many, as a matter
of fact, do succeed in evading the path appointed to them: throughout
the whole of history we can see the traces of such deserters and their
guilty consciences. In most cases,, however, there comes to such men
of destiny that hour of delivery, that autumnal season of maturity, in
which they are forced to do that which they did not even "wish to do":
and that deed before which in the past they have trembled most, falls
easily and unsought from the tree, as an involuntary deed, almost as a
present.973.The human horizon.—Philosophers may be conceived as men who make
the greatest efforts todiscoverto what extent man canelevatehimself—this holds good more particularly of Plato: how far man'spowercan extend. But they do this as individuals; perhaps the
instinct of Cæsars and of all founders of states, etc., was greater,
for it preoccupied itself with the question how far man could be urged
forward indevelopmentunder "favourable circumstances." What they
did not sufficiently understand, however, was the nature of favourable
circumstances. The great question: "Where has the plant 'man' grown
most magnificently heretofore? In order to answer this, a comparative
study of history is necessary.974.Every fact and every work exercises a fresh persuasion over every age
and every new species of man. History always enunciates new truths.975.To remain objective, severe, firm, and hard while making a thought
prevail is perhaps the best forte of artists; but if for this purpose
any one have to work upon human material (as teachers, statesmen,
have to do, etc.), then the repose, the coldness, and the hardness
soon vanish. In natures like Cæsar and Napoleon we are able to divine
something of the nature of "disinterestedness" in their work on their
marble, whatever be the number of men that are sacrificed in the
process. In this direction the future of higher men lies: to bear the
greatest responsibilities and not to go to rack and ruinthrough
them.—Hitherto the deceptions of inspiration have almost always been
necessary for a man not to lose faith in his own hand, and in his right
to his task.976.The reason why philosophers are mostly failures. Because among the
conditions which determine them there are qualities which generally
ruin other men:—(1) A philosopher must have an enormous multiplicity of qualities; he
must be a sort of abbreviation of man and have all man's high and base
desires: the danger of the contrast within him, and of the possibility
of his loathing himself;(2) He must be inquisitive in an extraordinary number of ways: the
danger of versatility;(3) He must be just and honest in the highest sense, but profound both
in love and hate (and in injustice);(4) He must not only be a spectator but a lawgiver: a judge and
defendant (in so far as he is an abbreviation of the world);(5) He must be extremely multiform and yet firm and hard. He must be
supple.977.The reallyregalcalling of the philosopher (according to the
expression of Alcuin the Anglo-Saxon): "Prava corrigere, et recta
corroborare, et sancta sublimare."978.The new philosopher can only arise in conjunction with a ruling class,
as the highest spiritualisation of the latter. Great politics, the
rule of the earth, as a proximate contingency, the totallack of
principlesnecessary thereto.979.Fundamental concept: the new values must first be created—this remainsour duty! The philosopher must be our lawgiver. New species. (How the
greatest species hitherto [for instance, the Greeks] were reared: this
kind of accident must now beconsciouslystriven for.)980.Supposing one thinks of the philosopher as an educator who, looking
down from his lonely elevation, is powerful enough to draw long chains
of generations up to him: then he must be granted the most terrible
privileges of a great educator. An educator never says what he himself
thinks; but only that which he thinks it is good for those whom he is
educating to hear upon any subject. This dissimulation on his part
must not be found out; it is part of his masterliness that people
should believe in his honesty, he must be capable of all the means of
discipline and education: there are some natures which he will only be
able to raise by means of lashing them with his scorn; others who are
lazy, irresolute, cowardly, and vain, he willbe able to affect only
with exaggerated praise. Such a teacher stands beyond good and evil,
but nobody must know that he does.981.We mustnotmake men "better," we mustnottalk to them about
morality in any form as if "morality in itself," or an ideal kind
of man in general, could be taken for granted; but we mustcreate
circumstancesin whichstronger men are necessary,such as for
their part will require a morality (or, better still: a bodily and
spiritual discipline) which makes men strong, and upon which they will
consequently insist! As they will need one so badly, they will have it.We must not let ourselves be seduced by blue eyes and heaving breasts:greatness of soul has absolutely nothing romantic about it. And
unfortunately nothing whatever amiable either.982.From warriors we must learn: (1) to associate death with those
interests for which we are fighting—that makes us venerable; (2) we
must learn tosacrificenumbers, and to take our cause sufficiently
seriously not to spare men; (3) we must practise inexorable discipline,
and allow ourselves violence and cunning in war.983.Theeducationwhich rears thoserulingvirtues that allow a man to
become master of his benevolenceand his pity: the great disciplinary
virtues ("Forgive thine enemies" is mere child's play beside them),and the passions of the creator, must be elevatedto the heights—we
must cease from carving marble! The exceptional and powerful position
of those creatures (compared with that of all princes hitherto): the
Roman Cæsar with Christ's soul.984.We must not separate greatness of soul from intellectual greatness. For
the former involvesindependence; but without intellectual greatness
independence should not be allowed; all it does is to create disasters
even in its lust of well-doing and of practising "justice." Inferior
spiritsmustobey, consequently they cannot be possessed of greatness.985.The more lofty philosophical man who is surrounded by loneliness, not
because he wishes to be alone, but because he is what he is, and cannot
find his equal: what a number of dangers and torments are reserved for
him, precisely at the present time, when we have lost our belief in
the order of rank, and consequently no longer know how to understand
or honour this isolation! Formerly the sage almost sanctified himself
in the consciences of the mob by going aside in this way; to-day
the anchorite sees himself as though enveloped in a cloud of gloomy
doubt and suspicions. And not alone by theenvious and the wretched:
in every well-meant act that he experiences he is bound to discover
misunderstanding, neglect, and superficiality. He knows the crafty
tricks of foolish pity which makes these people feel so good and holy
when they attempt to save him from his own destiny, by giving him more
comfortable situations and more decent and reliable society. Yes, he
will even get to admire the unconscious lust of destruction with which
all mediocre spirits stand up and oppose him, believing all the while
that they have a holy right to do so! For men of such incomprehensible
loneliness it is necessary to put a good stretch of country between
them and the officiousness of their fellows: this is part of their
prudence. For such a man to maintain himself uppermost to-day amid
the dangerous maelstroms of the age which threaten to draw him under,
even cunning and disguise will be necessary. Every attempt he makes to
order his life in the present and with the present, every time he draws
near to these men and their modern desires, he will have to expiate as
if it were an actual sin: and withal he may look with wonder at the
concealed wisdom of his nature, which after every one of these attempts
immediately leads him back to himself by means of illnesses and painful
accidents.986."Maledetto coluiche contrista, un spirto immortal!"MANZONI(Conte di Carmagnola,Act II.)987.The most difficult and the highest form which man can attain is the
most seldom successful: thus the history of philosophy reveals a
superabundance of bungled and unhappy cases of manhood, and its march
is an extremely slow one; whole centuries intervene and suppress what
has been achieved: and in this way the connecting-link is always made
to fail. It is an appalling history, this history of the highest men,
of the sages.—What is most often damaged is precisely the recollection
of great men, for the semi-successful and botched cases of mankind
misunderstand them and overcome them by their "successes." Whenever
an "effect" is noticeable, the masses gather in a crowd round it;
to hear the inferior and the poor in spirit having their say is a
terrible ear-splitting torment for him who knows and trembles at the
thought, that the fate of man depends upon the success of its highest
types. From the days of my childhood I have reflected upon the sage's
conditions of existence, and I will not conceal my happy conviction
that in Europe he has once more become possible—perhaps only for a
short time.988.These new philosophers begin with a description of a systematic order
of rank and difference of value among men,—what they desire is, alas
precisely the reverse of an assimilation and equalisation of man: they
teach estrangementin every sense, they cleave gulfs such as have
never yet existed, and they would fain have man become more evil than
he ever was. For the present they live concealed and estranged even
from each other. For many reasons they will find it necessary to be
anchorites and to wear masks—they will therefore be of little use
in the matter of seeking for their equals. They will live alone, and
probably know the torments of all the loneliest forms of loneliness.
Should they, however, thanks to any accident, meet each other on the
road, I wager that they would not know each other, or that they would
deceive each other in a number of ways.989."Les philosophes ne sont pas faits pour s'aimer. Les aigles ne volent
point en compagnie. Il faut laisser cela aux perdrix, aux étourneaux
... Planer au-dessus et avoir des griffes, voila le lot des grands
génies."—GALIANI.990.I forgot to say that such philosophers are cheerful, and that they
like to sit in the abyss of a perfectly clear sky: they are in need of
different means for enduring life than other men; for they suffer in
a different way (that is to say, just as much from the depth of their
contempt of man as from their love of man).—The animal which suffered
most on earth discovered for itself—laughter.991.Concerning the misunderstanding of "cheerfulness."—It is a
temporary relief from long tension; it is the wantonness, the
Saturnalia of a spirit, which is consecrating and preparing itself for
long and terrible resolutions. The "fool" in the form of "science."992.The new order of rank among spirits; tragic natures no longer in the
van.993.It is a comfort to me to know that over the smoke and filth of human
baseness there is ahigher and brightermankind, which, judging from
their number, must be a small race (for everything that is in any way
distinguished isipso factorare). A man does not belong to this race
because he happens to be more gifted, more virtuous, more heroic, or
more loving than the men below, but because he iscolder, brighter,
more far-sighted, and more lonely;because he endures, prefers, and
even insists upon, loneliness as the joy, the privilege, yea, even the
condition of existence; because he lives amid clouds and lightnings as
among his equals, and likewise among sunrays, dewdrops, snowflakes,
and all that which must needs come from the heights, and which in its
course moves ever from heaven to earth. The desire to look aloft is not
our desire.—Heroes, martyrs, geniuses, and enthusiasts of allkinds,
are not quiet, patient, subtle, cold, or slow enough for us.994.The absolute conviction that valuations above and below are different;
that innumerable experiences are wanting to the latter: that when
looking upwards from below misunderstandings are necessary.995.How do men attain to great power and to great tasks? All the virtues
and proficiences of the body and the soul are little by little
laboriously acquired, through great industry, self-control, and keeping
one's self within narrow bounds, through a frequent, energetic, and
genuine repetition of the same work and of the same hardships; but
there are men who are the heirs and masters of this slowly acquired
and manifold treasure of virtues and proficiences because, owing
to happy and reasonable marriages and also to lucky accidents, the
acquired and accumulated forces of many generations, instead of being
squandered and subdivided, have been assembled together by means of
steadfast struggling and willing. And thus, in the end, a man appears
who is such a monster of strength, that he craves for a monstrous
task. For it is our power which has command of us: and the wretched
intellectual play of aims and intentions and motivations lies only in
the foreground—however much weak eyes may recognise the principal
factors in these things.990.The sublime man has the highest value, even when he is most delicate
and fragile, because an abundance of very difficult and rare things
have been reared through many generations and united in him.997.I teach that there are higher and lower men, and that a single
individual may under certain circumstances justify whole millenniums of
existence —that is to say, a wealthier, more gifted, greater, and more
complete man, as compared with innumerable imperfect and fragmentary
men.998.Away from rulers and rid of all bonds, live the highest men: and in the
rulers they have their instruments.999.The order of rank:he whodeterminesvalues and leads the will of
millenniums, and does this by leading the highest natures—heis the
highest man.1000.I fancy I have divined some of the things that lie hidden in the soul
of the highest man; perhaps every man who has divined so much must go
to ruin: but he who has seen the highest man must do all he can to
make himpossible.Fundamental thought: we must make the future the
standard of all our valuations—and not seek the laws for our conduct
behind us.1001.Not "mankind," butSupermanis the goal!1002."Come l'uom s'eterna...."—Inf.xv. 85.II.DIONYSUS.1003.Tohim who is one of Nature's lucky strokes,to, him unto whom my
heart goes out, to him who is carved from one integral block, which is
hard, sweet, and fragrant—to him from whom even my nose can derive
some pleasure—let this book be dedicated.He enjoys that which is beneficial to him.His pleasure in anything ceases when the limits of what is beneficial
to him are overstepped.He divines the remedies for partial injuries; his illnesses are the
great stimulants of his existence.He understands how to exploit his serious accidents.He grows stronger under the misfortunes which threaten to annihilate
him.He instinctively gathers from all he sees, hears, and experiences,
the materials for what concerns him most,—he pursues a selective
principle,—he rejects a good deal.He reacts with that tardiness which long cautionand deliberatepridehave bred in him,—he tests the stimulus: whence does it come?
whither does it lead? He does not submit.He is always in his own company, whether his intercourse be with books,
with men, or with Nature.He honours anything by choosing it, by conceding to it, by trusting it.1004.We should attain to such a height, to such a lofty eagle's ledge, in
our observation, as to be able to understand that everything happens,just as it ought to happen: and that all "imperfection," and the pain
it brings, belong to all that which is most eminently desirable.1005.Towards 1876 I experienced a fright; for I saw that everything I had
most wished for up to that time was being compromised. I realised this
when I perceived what Wagner was actually driving at: and I was bound
very fast to him—by all the bonds of a profound similarity of needs,
by gratitude, by the thought that he could not be replaced, and by the
absolute void which I saw facing me.Just about this time I believed myself to be inextricably entangled in
my philology and my professorship—in the accident and last shift of my
life: I did not know how to get out of it, and was tired, used up, and
on my last legs.At about the same time I realised that what my instincts most desired
to attain was precisely the reverse of what Schopenhauer's instincts
wanted—that is to say, ajustification of life,even where it was
most terrible, most equivocal, and most false: to this end, I had the
formula "Dionysian" in my hand.Schopenhauer's interpretation of the "absolute" aswillwas certainly
a step towards that concept of the "absolute" which supposed it to be
necessarily good, blessed, true, and integral, but Schopenhauer did
not understand how to deify this will: he remained suspended in the
moral-Christian ideal. Indeed, he was still so very much under the
dominion of Christian values, that, once he could no longer regard
the absolute as God, he had to conceive it as evil, foolish, utterly
reprehensible. He did not realise that there is an infinite number of
ways of being different, and even of being God.1006.Hitherto, moral values have been the highest values: does anybody doubt
this? If we bring down the values from their pedestal, we thereby
alterallvalues; the principle of theirorder of rankwhich has
prevailed hitherto is thus overthrown.1007.Transvalue values—what does this mean? It implies that all spontaneous
motives, all new,future, and stronger motives, are still extant; but
that they now appear under false names and false valuations, and have
not yet become conscious of themselves.We ought to have the courage to become, conscious, and to affirm all
that which has beenattained—to get rid of the humdrum character
of old valuations, which makes us unworthy of the best and strongest
things that we have achieved.1008.Any doctrine would be superfluous for which everything is not already
prepared in the way of accumulated forces and explosive material. A
transvaluation of values can only be accomplished when there is a
tension of new needs, and a new set of needy people who feel all old
values as painful,—although they are not conscious of what is wrong.1009.The standpoint from which my values are determined: is abundance or
desire active? ... Is one a mere spectator, or is one's own shoulder
at the wheel—is one looking away or is one turning aside? ... Is one
acting spontaneously, as the result of accumulated strength, or is one
merely reacting to a goad or to a stimulus? ... Is one simply acting
as the result of a paucity of elements, or of such an overwhelming
dominion over a host of elements that this power enlists the latter
into its service if it requires them? ... Is one aproblemone's
self or is one asolutionalready? ... Isone perfectthrough
the smallness of the task, orimperfectowing to the extraordinary
character of the aim? ... Is one genuine or only anactor;is one
genuine as an actor, or only the bad copy of an actor? is one a
representative or the creature represented? Is one a personality or
merely a rendezvous of personalities? ... Is one ill from a disease or
from surplus health? Does one lead as a shepherd, or as an "exception"
(third alternative: as a fugitive)? Is one in need of dignity, or can
one play the clown? Is one in search of resistance, or is one evading
it? Is one imperfect owing to one's precocity or to one's tardiness? Is
it one's nature to say yea, or no, or is one a peacock's tail of garish
parts? Is one proud enough not to feel ashamed even of one's vanity? Is
one still able to feel a bite of conscience (this species is becoming
rare; formerly conscience had to bite too often: it is as if it now no
longer had enough teeth to do so)? Is one still capable of a "duty"?
(there are some people who would lose the whole joy of their lives
if they weredeprivedof their duty—this holds good especially of
feminine creatures, who are born subjects).1010.Supposing our common comprehension of the universe were amisunderstanding,would it be possible to conceive of a form ofperfection,within the limits of which even such amisunderstanding
as thiscould be sanctioned?The concept of anewform of perfection: thatwhich doesnotcorrespond to our logic, to our "beauty," to our "good," to our
"truth," might be perfect in ahighersense even than our ideal is.1011.Our most important limitation: we must not deify the unknown; we are
just beginning to know so little. The false and wasted endeavours.Our "new world": we must ascertain to what extent we are thecreatorsof our valuations—we will thus be able to put "sense" into history.This belief in truth is reaching its final logical conclusion in
us—ye know how it reads: that if there is anything at all that must
be worshipped it isappearance;thatfalsehoodandnottruth
is—divine.1012.He who urges rational thought forward, thereby also drives its
antagonistic power—mysticism and foolery of every kind—to new feats
of strength.We should recognise that every movement is (1)partlythe
manifestation of fatigue resulting from a previous movement (satiety
after it, the malice of weakness towards it, and disease); and (2)partlya newly awakened accumulation of long slumbering forces, and
therefore wanton, violent, healthy.1013.Health and morbidness: let us be careful! The standard is the bloom of
the body, the agility, courage, and cheerfulness of the mind—but also,
ofcourse, how muchmorbidness a man can bear and overcome,—and
convert into health. That which would send more delicate natures to the
dogs, belongs to the stimulating means ofgreathealth.1014.It is only a question of power: to have all the morbid traits of the
century, but to balance them I by means of overflowing, plastic, and
rejuvenating power. Thestrongman.1015.Concerning the strength of the nineteenth century.—We are more
mediæval than the eighteenth century; not only more inquisitive or more
susceptible to the strange and to the rare. We have revolted against
theRevolution,... We have freed ourselves from the fear of reason,
which was the spectre of the eighteenth century: we once more dare to
be childish, lyrical, absurd, in a word, we are musicians. And we are
just as little frightened of theridiculousas of theabsurd.Thedevilfinds that he is tolerated even by God:[6]better still, he has
become interesting as one who has been misunderstood and slandered for
ages,—we are the saviours of the devil's honour.We no longer separate the great from the terrible. We reconcile good
things, in all their complexity,with the veryworstthings; we
have overcome thedesideratumof the past (which wanted goodness to
grow without the increase of evil). Thecowardicetowards the ideal,
peculiar to the Renaissance, has diminished—we even dare to aspire to
the latter's morality.Intolerancetowards priests and the Church has
at the same time come to an end; "It is immoral to believe in God"—but
this is precisely what we regard as the best possible justification of
this belief.On all these things we have conferred the civic rights of our minds. We
do not tremble before the back side of "good things" (we even look for
it, we are brave and inquisitive enough for that), of Greek antiquity,
of morality, of reason, of good taste, for instance (we reckon up
the losses which we incur with all this treasure: we almost reduce
ourselves to poverty with such a treasure). Neither do we conceal the
back side of "evil things" from ourselves.[6]This is reminiscent of Goethe'sFaust,See "Prologue in
Heaven."—Tr.1016.That which does us honour.—If anything does us honour, it is this:
we have transferred our seriousness to other things; all those things
which have been despised and laid aside as base by all ages, we regard
as important—on the other hand, we surrender "fine feelings" at a
cheap rate.Could any aberration be more dangerous than the contempt of the body?
As if all intellectuality were not thereby condemned to become morbid,
and to take refuge in thevapeursof "idealism"!Nothing that has been thought out by Christiansand idealists holds
water: we are more radical. We have discovered the "smallest world"
everywhere as the most decisive.The paving-stones in the streets, good air in our rooms, food
understood according to its worth: we value all thenecessariesof
life seriously, anddespiseall "beautiful soulfulness" as a form of
"levity and frivolity." That which has been most despised hitherto, is
now pressed into the front rank.1017In the place of Rousseau's "man of Nature," the nineteenth century has
discovered a muchmore genuineimage of "Man,"—it had the courage
to do this.... On the whole, the Christian concept of man has in a way
been reinstalled. What we have not had the courage to do, was to call
precisely this "manpar excellence," good, and to see the future of
mankind guaranteed in him. In the same way, we did not dare to regard
thegrowth in the terrible sideof man's character as an accompanying
feature of every advance in culture; in this sense we are still
under the influence of the Christian ideal, and side with it against
paganism, and likewise against the Renaissance concept ofvirtù.But
the key of culture is not to be found in this way: andin praxiwe
still have the forgeries of history in favour of the "good man" (as if
he alone constituted the progress of humanity) and thesocialistic
ideal (i.e.theresidueof Christianity and of Rousseau in the
de-Christianised world).The fight against the eighteenth century:it meets with itsgreatest
conquerorsinGoetheandNapoleon.Schopenhauer, too, fights
against the eighteenth century; but he returns involuntarily to
the seventeenth—he is a modern Pascal, with Pascalian valuations,withoutChristianity. Schopenhauer was not strong enough to invent anew yea.Napoleon:we see the necessary relationship between the higher and
the terrible man. "Man" reinstalled, and her due of contempt and fear
restored to woman. Highest activity and health are the signs of the
great man; the straight line and grand style rediscovered in action;
the mightiest of all instincts, that of life itself,—the lust of
dominion,—heartily welcomed.1018.(Revue des deux mondes,15th February 1887. Taine concerning
Napoleon) "Suddenly the master faculty reveals itself: theartist,which was latent in the politician, comes forth from his scabbard; he
createsdans l'idéal et l'impossible.He is once more recognised as
that which he is: the posthumous brother of Dante and of Michelangelo;
and verily, in view of the definite contours of his vision, the
intensity, the coherence, and inner consistency of his dream, the depth
of his meditations, the superhuman greatness of his conception, he is
their equal:son génie a la même taille et la même structure; il est
un des trois esprits souverains de la renaissance italienne."Nota bene.Dante, Michelangelo, Napoleon.1019.Concerning the pessimism of strength.In the internal economy ofthe primitiveman's soul, thefearof evil preponderates. What isevil!Three kinds of things: accident, uncertainty, the unexpected.
How does primitive man combat evil?—He conceives it as a thing of
reason, of power, even as a person. By this means he is enabled to
make treaties with it, and generally to operate upon it in advance—to
forestall it.—Another expedient is to declare its evil and harmful character to
be but apparent: the consequences of accidental occurrences, and of
uncertainty and the unexpected, are interpreted aswell-meant,as
reasonable.—A third means is to interpret evil, above all, as merited: evil is
thus justified as a punishment.—In short,man submits to inall religious and moral interpretations
are but forms of submission to evil.—The belief that a good purpose
lies behind all evil, implies the renunciation of any desire to combat
it.Now, the history of every culture shows a diminution of thisfear
of the accidental, of the uncertain, and of the unexpected.Culture
means precisely, to learn to reckon, to discover causes, to acquire
the power of forestalling events, to acquire a belief in necessity.
With the growth of culture, man is able to dispense with that primitive
form of submission to evil (called religion or morality), and that
"justification of evil." Now he wages war against "evil,"—he gets rid
of it. Yes, a state ofsecurity, of belief in law and the possibility
of calculation, is possible, in which consciousness regards these
things with tedium,—in which the joy of the accidental, of the
uncertain, and of the unexpected, actually becomes a spur.Let us halt a moment before this symptom ofhighestculture, I
call it thepessimism of strength.Man now no longer requires a
"justification of evil"; justification is precisely what he abhors:
he enjoys evil,pur, cru; he regards purposeless evil as the most
interesting kind of evil. If he had required a God in the past, he now
delights in cosmic disorder without a God, a world of accident, to the
essence of which terror, ambiguity, and seductiveness belong.In a state of this sort, it is preciselygoodnesswhich requires
to be justified—that is to say, it must either have an evil and a
dangerous basis, or else it must contain a vast amount of stupidity:in which case it still pleases.Animality no longer awakens terror
now; a very intellectual and happy wanton spirit in favour of the
animal in man, is, in such periods, the most triumphant form of
spirituality. Man is now strong enough to be able to feel ashamed ofa belief in God:he may now play the part of the devil's advocate
afresh. If in practice he pretends to uphold virtue, it will be for
those reasons which lead virtue to be associated with subtlety,
cunning, lust of gain, and a form of the lust of power.This pessimism of strengthalso ends in atheodicy, i.e.in an
absolute saying of yea to the world—but the same arguments will
be raised in favour oflife which formerly were raised against it:
and in this way, in a conception of this worldas the highest ideal
possible,which has been effectively attained.1020.The principal kinds of pessimism:—The pessimism ofsensitiveness(excessive irritability with a
preponderance of the feelings of pain).The pessimism of thewill that is not free(otherwise expressed: the
lack of resisting power against stimuli).The pessimism ofdoubt(shyness in regard to everything fixed, in
regard to all grasping and touching).The psychological conditions which belong to these different kinds of
pessimism, may all be observed in a lunatic asylum, even though they
are there found in a slightly exaggerated form. The same applies to
"Nihilism" (the penetrating feeling of nonentity).What, however, is the nature of Pascal's moral pessimism, and themetaphysical pessimismof the Vedânta-Philosophy? What is the nature
of thesocial pessimismof anarchists (as of Shelley), and of the
pessimism of compassion (like that of Leo Tolstoy and of Alfred de
Vigny)?Are all these things not also the phenomena of decay and sickness?...
And is not excessive seriousness in regard to moral values, or in
regard to "other-world" fictions, or social calamities, orsufferingin general, of the same order? All suchexaggerationof a single and
narrow standpoint isin itself a sign of sickness. The same applies to
the preponderance of a negative over an affirmative attitude!In this respect we must not confound with the above:the joy of
saying and doingno,which is the result of the enormous power and
tenseness of an affirmative attitude—peculiar to all rich and mighty
men and ages. It is, as it were, a luxury, a form of courage too,
which opposes the terrible, which has sympathy with the frightful and
the questionable, because, among other things, one is terrible and
questionable: theDionysianin will, intellect, and taste.1021.My Five "Noes."(1) My fight againstthe feeling of sinand the introduction of
the notion ofpunishmentinto the physical and metaphysical world,
likewise into psychology and the interpretation of history. The
recognition of the fact that all philosophies and valuations hitherto
have been saturated with morality.(2) My identification and my discovery of thetraditionalideal,
of the Christian ideal, even where the dogmatic form of Christianity
has been wrecked. Thedanger of the Christian idealresides in its
valuations, in that which can dispense with concrete expression: my
struggle againstlatent Christianity(for instance, in music, in
Socialism).(3) My struggle against the eighteenth century of Rousseau, against
his "Nature," against his "goodman," his belief in the dominion of
feeling—against the pampering, weakening, and moralising of man: an
ideal born of thehatred of aristocratic culture,which in practice
is the dominion of unbridled feelings of resentment, and invented as a
standard for the purpose of war (the Christian morality of the feeling
of sin, as well as the morality of resentment, is an attitude of the
mob).(4) My fight againstRomanticism,in which the ideals of Christianity
and of Rousseau converge, but which possesses at the same time a
yearning for thatantiquitywhich knew of sacerdotal and aristocratic
culture, a yearning forvirtù,and for the "strong man"—something
extremely hybrid; a false and imitated kind ofstrongerhumanity,
which appreciates extreme conditions in general and sees the symptom
of strength in them ("the cult of passion"; an imitation of the
most expressiveforms, furore espressivo,originating not out of
plenitude, but outof want).—(In the nineteenth century there are
some things which are born out of relative plenitude—i.e.out ofwell-being;cheerful music, etc.—among poets, for instance, Stifter
and Gottfried Keller give signs of more strength and inner well-being
than—. The great strides of engineering, of inventions, of the natural
sciences and of history (?) are relative products of the strength and
self-reliance of the nineteenth century.)(5) My struggle against thepredominance of gregarious instincts,now
science makes common cause with them; against the profound hate with
which every kind of order of rank and of aloofness is treated.1022.From the pressure of plenitude, from the tension of forces that are
continually increasing within us and which cannot yet discharge
themselves, a condition is produced which is very similar to that which
precedes a storm: we—like Nature's sky—become overcast. I hat, too,
is "pessimism.".. A teaching which puts an end to such a condition by
the fact that itcommandssomething: a transvaluation of values by
means of which the accumulated forces are given a channel, a direction,
so that they explode into deeds and flashes of lightning-does not
in the least require to be a hedonistic teaching: in so far as itreleases strengthwhich was compressed to an agonising degree, it
brings happiness.1023.Pleasureappears with the feeling of power.Happinessmeans that the consciousness of power and triumph has begun
to prevail.Progressis the strengthening of the type, the ability to exercise
great will-power, everything else is a misunderstanding and a danger.1024.There comes a time when the old masquerade and moral togging-up of the
passions provokes repugnance:naked Nature;when thequantaofpowerare recognised asdecidedlysimple (asdetermining rank);
whengrand styleappears again as the result of great passion.1025.The purpose of culturewould haveus enlist everything terrible,
step by step and experimentally, into its service; but before it isstrong enoughfor this it must combat, moderate, mask, and even curse
everything terrible.Wherever a culture points to anything as evil, it betrays itsfearand therefore weakness.Thesis:everything good is the evil of yore which has been rendered
serviceable.Standard:the more terrible and the greater the passions
may be which an age, a people, and an individual are at liberty to
possess, because they are able to use them asa means, the higher is
their culture:the more mediocre, weak, submissive, and cowardly a man
may be, the more things he will regard asevil:according to him the
kingdom of evil is the largest. The lowest man will see the kingdom of
evil (i.e.that which is forbidden him and which is hostile to him)
everywhere.1026.It is not a fact that "happiness follows virtue"—but it is the mighty
man who firstdeclares his happy state to be virtue.Evil actions belong to the mighty and the virtuous: bad and base
actions belong to the subjected.The mightiest man, the creator, would have to be the most evil,
inasmuch as he makes his ideal prevail over all men inoppositionto
their ideals, and remoulds them according to his own image.Evil, in this respect, means hard, painful, enforced.Such men as Napoleon must always return and always settle our belief
in the self-glory of the individual afresh: he himself, however, was
corrupted by the means he had to stoop to, and hadlost noblesseof character. If he had had to prevail among another kind of men, he
could have availed himself of other means; and thus it would not seemnecessarythat a Cæsarmust become bad.1027.Man is a combination of thebeastand thesuper-beast; higher
man a combination of the monster and the superman:[7]these opposites
belong to each other. With every degree of a man's growth towards
greatness and loftiness, he also grows downwards into the depths and
into the terrible: we should not desire the one without the other;—or,
better still: the more fundamentally we desire the one, the more
completely we shall achieve the other.