[7]The play on the German words: "Unthier" and "Überthier,"
"Unmensch" and "Übermensch," is unfortunately not translatable.—Tr.1028.Terribleness belongs to greatness: let us not deceive ourselves.1029.I have taught the knowledge of such terrible things, that all
"Epicurean contentment" isimpossible concerning them. Dionysian
pleasure is the onlyadequatekind here:I was the first to discover
the tragic.Thanks to their superficiality in ethics, the Greeks
misunderstood it. Resignation is not the lesson of tragedy, but only
the misunderstanding of it! The yearning for nonentity is thedenialof tragic wisdom, its opposite!1030.A rich and powerful soul not only gets over painful and even terrible
losses, deprivations, robberies, and insults: it actually leaves such
dark infernos in possession of still greater plenitude and power;
and, what is most important of all, in possession of an increased
blissfulness in love. I believe that he who has divined something of
the most fundamental conditions of love, will understand Dante for
having written over the door of his Inferno: "I also am the creation of
eternal love."1031.To have travelled over the whole circumference of the modern soul,
and to have sat in all its corners—my ambition, my torment, and my
happiness.Veritably to haveovercomepessimism, and, as the result thereof, to
have acquired the eyes of a Goethe—full of love and goodwill.1032.The first question is by no means whether we are satisfied with
ourselves; but whether we aresatisfied with anything at all. Granting
that we should say yea to any single moment, we have then affirmed
not only ourselves, but the whole of existence. For nothing stands by
itself, either in us or in other things: and if our soul has vibrated
and rung with happiness, like a chord, once only and only once, then
all eternity was necessary in order to bring about that one event,—and
all eternity, in this single moment of our affirmation, was called
good, was saved, justified, and blessed.1033.The passions whichsay yea.I ride, happiness, health, the love of
the sexes, hostility and war, reverence, beautiful attitudes, manners,
strong will, the discipline of lofty spirituality, the will to power,
and gratitude to the Earth and to Life: all that is rich, that would
fain bestow, and that refreshes, gilds, immortalises, and deifies
Life—the whole power of the virtues thatglorify—all declaring
things good, saying yea, and doing yea.1034.We, many or few, who once more dare to live in a worldpurged of
morality, wepagansin faith, we are probably also the first who
understand what apagan faithis: to be obliged to imagine higher
creatures than man, but to imagine thembeyondgood and evil; to be
compelled to value all higher existence asimmoralexistence. We
believe in Olympus, andnotin the "man on the cross."1035.The more modern man has exercised his idealising power in regard to aGodmostly bymoralising the latterever more and more—what does
that mean?—nothing good, a diminution in man's strength.As a matter of fact, the reverse would be possible: and indications
of this are not wanting. God imagined as emancipation from morality,
comprising the whole of the abundant assembly of Life's contrasts, andsavingandjustifyingthem in a divine agony. God as the beyond,
the superior elevation, to the wretchedcul-de-sacmorality of "Good
and Evil."1036.A humanitarian God cannot bedemonstratedfrom the world that
is known to us: so much are ye driven and forced to conclude
to-day. But what conclusion do ye draw from this? "He cannot be
demonstrated tous": the scepticism of knowledge. You allfearthe conclusion: "From the world that is known to us quite a different
God would bedemonstrable,such a one as would certainly not be
humanitarian"—and, in a word, you cling fast to your God, and invent a
world for Him whichis unknown to us.1037.Let us banish the highest good from our concept of God: it is unworthy
of a God. Let uslikewise banish the highest wisdom: it is the vanity
of philosophers who have perpetrated the absurdity of a God who is a
monster of wisdom: the idea was to make Him as like them as possible.
No! Godas the highest power—that is sufficient!—Everything
follows from that, even—"the world"!1038And how many new Gods are not still possible! I, myself, in whom the
religious—that is to say, the god-creatinginstinct occasionally
becomes active at the most inappropriate moments: how very differently
the divine has revealed itself every time to me! ... So many strange
things have passed before me in those timeless moments, which fall into
a man's life as if they came from the moon, and in which he absolutely
no longer knows how old he is or how young he still may be! ... I would
not doubt that there are several kinds of gods.... Some are not wanting
which one could not possibly imagine without a certain halcyonic calm
and levity.... Light feet perhaps belong to the concept "God". Is it
necessary to explain that aGodknows how to hold Himself preferably
outside all Philistine and rationalist circles? also (between
ourselves) beyond good and evil? His outlook is afreeone—as Goethe
would say.—And to invoke the authority of Zarathustra, which cannot be
too highly appreciated in this regard: Zarathustra goes as far as to
confess, "I would only believe in a God who knew how todance..."Again I say: how many new Gods are not still possible! Certainly
Zarathustra himself is merely an old atheist: he believes neither in
old nor in new gods. Zarathustra says,"he would"—but Zarathustra
will not.... Take care to understand him well.The type God conceived according to the type of creative spirits, of
"great men."1039.And how many newidealsare not, at bottom, still possible? Here is
a little ideal that I seize upon every five weeks, while upon a wild
and lonely walk, in the azure moment of a blasphemous joy. To spend
one's life amid delicate and absurd things; a stranger to reality,
half-artist, half-bird, half-metaphysician; without a yea or a nay for
reality, save that from time to time one acknowledges it, after the
manner of a good dancer, with the tips of one's toes; always tickled
by some happy ray of sunlight; relieved and encouraged even by sorrow
—for sorrowpreservesthe happy man; fixing a little tail of jokes
even to the most holy thing: this, as is clear, is the ideal of a heavy
spirit, a ton in weightof the spirit of gravity.1040.From the military-school of the soul.(Dedicated to the brave, the
good-humoured, and the abstinent.)I should not like to undervalue the amiable virtues; but greatness
of soul is not compatible withthem. Even in the arts, grand style
excludes all merely pleasing qualities.***In times of painful tension and vulnerability, choose war. War hardens
and develops muscle.***Those who have been deeply wounded have the Olympian laughter; a man
only has what he needs.***It has now already lasted ten years: no sound any longerreachesme—a land without rain. A man must have a vast amount of humanity at
his disposal in order not to pine away in such drought.[8][8]For the benefit of those readers who are not acquainted
with the circumstances of Nietzsche's life, it would be as well to
point out that this is a purely personal plaint, comprehensible enough
in the mouth of one who, like Nietzsche, was for years a lonely
anchorite.—Tr.1041.My new road to an affirmative attitude.—Philosophy, as I have
understood it and lived it up to the present, is the voluntary quest
of the repulsive and atrocious aspects of existence. From the long
experience derived from such wandering over ice and desert, I learnt
to regard quite differently everything that had been philosophised
hitherto: theconcealedhistory of philosophy, the psychology of its
great names came into the light for me. "How much truth can a spiritendure; for how much truth is itdaringenough?"—this for me
was the realmeasure of value. Error is a piece ofcowardice...
every victory on the part of knowledge, is theresultof courage, of
hardness towards one's self, of cleanliness towards one's self.... The
kind ofexperimental philosophywhich I am living, even anticipates
the possibility of the most fundamental Nihilism, on principle: but
by this I do not mean that it remains standing at a negation, at ano,or at a will to negation. It would rather attain to the very
reverse—to aDionysian affirmationof the world, as it is, without
subtraction, exception, or choice—it would have eternal circular
motion: the same things, the same reasoning, and the same illogical
concatenation. The highest state to which a philosopher can attain: to
maintain a Dionysian attitude to Life—my formula for this isamor
fati.To this end we must not only consider those aspects of life which
have been denied hitherto, as:necessary,but as desirable, and not
only desirable to those aspects which have been affirmed hitherto (as
complements or first prerequisites, so to speak), but for their own
sake, as the more powerful, more terrible, and moreveritableaspects
of life, in which the latter's will expresses itself most clearly.To this end, we must also value that aspect of existence which alone
has been affirmed until now; we must understand whence this valuation
arises, and to how slight an extent it has to do with a Dionysian
valuation of Life: I selected and understood that which in this respect
says "yea" (on the one hand, the instinct of the sufferer; on the
other, the gregarious instinct; and thirdly, theinstinct of the
greater numberagainst the exceptions).Thus I divined to what extent a stronger kind of man must necessarily
imagine—the elevation and enhancement of man in another direction:higher creatures,beyond good and evil, beyond those values which
bear the stamp of their origin in the sphere of suffering, of the herd,
and of the greater number—I searched for the data of this topsy-turvy
formation of ideals in history (the concepts "pagan," "classical,"
"noble," have been discovered afresh and brought forward).1042.We should demonstrate to what extent the religion of the Greeks washigherthan Judæo-Christianity. The latter triumphed because the
Greek religion was degenerate (and decadent).1043.It is not surprising that a couple of centuries have been necessary in
order to link up again—a couple of centuries are very little indeed.1044.There must be some people who sanctify functions, not only eating and
drinking, and not only in memory of them, or in harmony with them; but
this world must be for ever glorified anew, and in a novel fashion.1045.The most intellectual men feel the ecstasy and charm ofsensualthings in a way which other men—those with "fleshy hearts"—cannot
possibly imagine, and ought not to be able to imagine: they are
sensualists with the best possible faith, because they grant the senses
a more fundamental value than that fine sieve, that thinning and
mincing machine, or whatever it is called, which in the language of the
people is termed"spirit"The strength and power of the senses—this
is the most essential thing in a sound man who is one of Nature's lucky
strokes: the splendid beast must first be there—otherwise what is the
value of all "humanisation"?1046.(1) We want to hold fast to our senses, and to the belief in them—and
accept their logical conclusions! The hostility to the senses in the
philosophy that has been written up to the present, has been man's
greatest feat of nonsense.(2) The world now extant, on which all earthly and living things have
so built themselves, that it now appears as it does (enduring and
proceeding slowly), we would faincontinue building—not criticise it
away as false!(3) Our valuations help in the process of building; they emphasise and
accentuate. What does it mean when whole religions say: "Everything is
bad and false and evil"? This condemnation of the whole process can
only be the judgment of the failures!(4) True, the failures might be the greatest sufferers and therefore
the most subtle! The contented might be worth little!(5) We must understand the fundamentalartisticphenomenon which is
called "Life,"—the formativespirit, which constructs under the most
unfavourable circumstances: and in the slowest manner possible——Theproofof all its combinations must first be given afresh:it
maintains itself.1047.Sexuality, lust of dominion, the pleasure derived from appearance
and deception, great and joyful gratitude to Life and its typical
conditions—these things are essential to all paganism, and it has
a good conscience on its side.—That which is hostile to Nature(already in Greek antiquity) combats paganism in the form of morality
and dialectics.1040.An anti-metaphysical view of the world—yes, but an artistic one.1049.Apollo'smisapprehension: the eternity of beautiful forms, the
aristocratic prescription, "Thus shall it ever be!"Dionysus. Sensuality and cruelty. The perishable nature of existence
might be interpreted as the joy of procreative and destructive force,
asunremitting creation.1050.The word "Dionysian" expresses: a constraint to unity, a soaring
above personality, the common-place,society, reality, and above
the abyss of theephemeral, the passionately painful sensation of
superabundance, in darker, fuller, and more fluctuating conditions;
an ecstatic saying of yea to the collective character of existence,
as that which remains the same, and equally mighty and blissful
throughout all change, the great pantheistic sympathy with pleasure
and pain, which declares even the most terrible and most questionable
qualities of existence good, and sanctifies them; the eternal will to
procreation, to fruitfulness, and to recurrence; the feeling of unity
in regard to the necessity of creating and annihilating.The word "Apollonian" expresses: the constraint to be absolutely
isolated, to the typical "individual," to everything that simplifies,
distinguishes, and makes strong, salient, definite, and typical to
freedom within the law.The further development of art is just as necessarily bound up with the
antagonism of these two natural art-forces, as the further development
of mankind is bound up with the antagonism of the sexes. The plenitude
of power and restraint, the highest form of self-affirmation in a cool,
noble, and reserved kind of beauty: the Apollonianism of the Hellenic
will.This antagonism of the Dionysian and of the Apollonian in the Greek
soul, is one of the great riddles which made me feel drawn to the
essence of Hellenism. At bottom, I troubled about nothing save the
solution of the question, why precisely Greek Apollonianism should have
been forced to grow out of a Dionysian soil: the Dionysian Greekhad
need of being Apollonian; that is to say in order to break his will to
the titanic, to the complex, to the uncertain, to the horrible by a
will to measure, to simplicity, and to submission to rule and concept.
Extravagance, wildness, and Asiatic tendencies lie at the root of the
Greeks. Their courage consists in their struggle with their Asiatic
nature: they were not given beauty, any more than they were given Logic
and moral! naturalness: in them these things are victories, they are
willed and fought for—they constitute thetriumphof the Greeks.1051.It is clear that only the rarest and most lucky cases of humanity
can attain to the highest and most sublime human joys in which Life
celebrates its own glorification; and this only happens when these
rare creatures themselves and their forbears have lived a long
preparatory life leading to this goal, without, however, having done
so consciously. It is then that an overflowing wealth of multifarious
forces and the most agile power of "free will" and lordly command
exist together in perfect concord in one man; then the intellect is
just as much at ease, or at home, in the senses as the senses are at
ease or at home in it; and everything that takes place in the latter
must give rise to extraordinarily subtle joys in the former. Andvice
versâ:just think of thisvice versâfor a moment in a man like
Hafiz; even Goethe, though to a lesser degree, gives some idea of this
process. Itis probable that, in such perfect and well-constituted
men, the most sensual functions are finally transfigured by a symbolic
elatedness of the highest intellectuality; in themselves they feel a
kind ofdeification of the bodyand are most remote from the ascetic
philosophy of the principle "God is a Spirit": from this principle it
is clear that the ascetic is the "botched man" who declares only that
to be good and "God" which is absolute, and which judges and condemns.From that height of joy in which man feels himself completely and
utterly a deified form and self-justification of nature, down to the
joy of healthy peasants and healthy semi-human beasts, the whole of
this long and enormous gradation of the light and colour ofhappinesswas called by the Greek—not without that grateful quivering of one
who is initiated into secret, not without much caution and pious
silence—by the godlike name:Dionysus.What thendoall modern
men—the children of a crumbling, multifarious, sick and strange ageknowof thecompassof Greek happiness, howcouldthey know
anything about it! Whence would the slaves of "modern ideas" derive
their right to Dionysian feasts!When the Greek body and soul were in full "bloom," and not, as it were,
in states of morbid exaltation and madness, there arose the secret
symbol of the loftiest affirmation and transfiguration of life and the
world that has ever existed. There we have astandardbeside which
everything that has grown since must seem too short, too poor, too
narrow: if we but pronounce the word"Dionysus" in the presence of
the best of more recent names and things, in the presence of Goethe,
for instance, or Beethoven, or Shakespeare, or Raphael, in a trice we
realise that our best things and moments arecondemned.Dionysus
is ajudge!Am I understood? There can be no doubt that the Greeks
sought to interpret, by means of their Dionysian experiences, the
final mysteries of the "destiny of the soul" and everything they knew
concerning the education and the purification of man, and above all
concerning the absolute hierarchy and inequality of value between man
and man. There is the deepest experience of all Greeks, which they
conceal beneath great silence,—we do not know the Greeksso long
as this hidden and sub-terranean access to them remains obstructed.
The indiscreet eyes of scholars will never perceive anything in these
things, however much learned energy may still have to be expended in
the service of this excavation—; even the noble zeal of such friends
of antiquity as Goethe and Winckelmann, seems to savour somewhat of
bad form and of arrogance, precisely in this respect. To wait and to
prepare oneself; to await the appearance of new sources of knowledge;
to prepare oneself in solitude for the sight of new faces and the
sound of new voices; to cleanse one's soul ever more and more of the
dust and noise, as of a country fair, which is peculiar to this age;
toovercomeeverything Christian by something super-Christian,
and not only to rid oneself of it,—for the Christian doctrine is
the counter-doctrine to the Dionysian; to rediscover theSouthin oneself, and to stretch a clear, glittering, andmysterious
southern sky above one; to reconquer the southern healthiness and
concealed power of the soul, once more for oneself; to increase the
compass of one's soul step by step, and to become more supernational,
more European, more super-European, more Oriental, and finally moreHellenic—for Hellenism was, as a matter of fact, the first great
union and synthesis of everything Oriental, and precisely on that
account, thebeginningof the European soul, the discovery ofour
"newworld":—he who lives under such imperatives, who knows what he
may not encounter some day? Possibly—anew dawn!1052.The two types; Dionysus and Christ on the Cross.We should ascertain
whether the typicallyreligiousman is a decadent phenomenon (the
great innovators are one and all morbid and epileptic); but do not let
us forget to include that type of the religious man who ispagan.Is
the pagan cult not a form of gratitude for, and affirmation of, Life?
Ought not its most representative type to be an apology and deification
of Life? The type of a well-constituted and ecstatically overflowing
spirit! The type of a spirit which absorbs the contradictions and
problems of existence, and whichsolvesthem!At this point I set up theDionysusof the Greeks: the religious
affirmation of Life, of the whole of Life, not of denied and partial
Life (it is typical that in this cult the sexual act awakens ideas of
depth, mystery, and reverence).Dionysusversus"Christ"; here you have the contrast. It isnota difference in regard to the martyrdom,—but the latter has a
different meaning. Life itself—Life s eternal fruitfulness and
recurrence caused anguish, destruction, and the will to annihilation.
In the other case, the suffering of the "Christ as the Innocent One"
stands as an objection against Life, it is the formula of Life's
condemnation.—Readers will guess that the problem concerns the meaning
of suffering; whether a Christian or a tragic meaning be given to it.
In the first case it is the road to a holy mode of existence; in the
second caseexistence itself is regarded as sufficiently holyto
justify an enormous amount of suffering. The tragic man says yea even
to the most excruciating suffering: he is sufficiently strong, rich,
and capable of deifying, to be able to do this; the Christian denies
even the happy lots on earth: he is weak, poor, and disinherited enough
to suffer from life in any form. God on the Cross is a curse upon Life,
a signpost directing people to deliver themselves from it;—Dionysus
cut into pieces is apromiseof Life: it will be for ever born anew,
and rise afresh from destruction.III.ETERNAL RECURRENCE.1053.My philosophy reveals the triumphant thought through which all other
systems of thought must ultimately perish. It is the great disciplinary
thought: those races that cannot bear it are doomed; those which regard
it as the greatest blessing are destined to rule.1054.Thegreatestof all fights: for this purpose a newweaponis
required.A hammer: a terrible alternative must be created. Europe must be
brought face to face with the logic of facts, and confronted with the
question whether its will for ruin is really earnest.General levelling down to mediocrity must be avoided. Rather than this
it would be preferable to perish.1055.A pessimistic attitude of mind and a pessimistic doctrine and ecstatic
Nihilism, may incertain circumstances even prove indispensable to the
philosopher—that is to say, as a mighty form of pressure, or hammer,
with which he can smash up degenerate, perishing races and put them out
of existence; with which he can beat a track to a new order of life,
or instil a longing for nonentity in those who are degenerate and who
desire to perish.1056.I wish to teach the thought which gives unto many the right to cancel
their existences—the great disciplinary thought.1057.Eternal Recurrence.A prophecy.1. The exposition of the doctrine and itstheoreticalfirst
principles and results.2. The proof of the doctrine.3. Probable results which will follow from its beingbelieved.(It
makes everything break open.)(a)The means of enduring it.(b)The means of ignoring it.4. Its place in history is a means.The periodofgreatest danger. The foundation of an oligarchyabovepeoples and their interests: education directed at establishing a
political policy for humanity in general.A counterpart of Jesuitism.1058.The two greatest philosophical points of view (both discovered by
Germans).(a) That ofbecomingand that ofevolution.(b) That based upon thevalues of existence(but the wretched form of
German pessimism must first be overcome!)—Both points of view reconciled by me in a decisive manner.Everything becomes and returns for ever,escape is impossible!Granted that wecouldappraise the value of existence, what would
be the result of it? The thought of recurrence is a principleof
selectionin the service ofpower(and barbarity!).The ripeness of man for this thought.1059.1. The thought of eternal recurrence: its first principles which must
necessarily be true if it were true. What its result is.2. It is the mostoppressivethought: its probable results, provided
it be not prevented, that is to say, provided all values be not
transvalued.3. The means ofenduring it:the transvaluation of all values.
Pleasure no longer to be found in certainty, but in uncertainty; no
longer "cause and effect," but continual creativeness; no longer
the will to self-preservation, but to power; no longer the modest
expression "it is allonlysubjective," but "it is allourwork!
let us be proud of it."1060.In order to endure the thought of recurrence, freedom from morality
is necessary; new means against thefact pain(pain regarded as
the instrument, as the father of pleasure; there is no accretive
consciousness of pain); pleasure derived from all kinds of uncertainty
and tentativeness, as a counterpoise to extreme fatalism; suppression
of the concept "necessity"; suppression of the "will"; suppression of
"absolute knowledge."Greatest elevationof man'sconsciousness of strength,as that
which creates superman.1061.The two extremes of thought—the materialistic and the platonic—are
reconciled ineternal recurrence: both are regarded as ideals.1062.If the universe had a goal, that goal would have been reached by now.
If any sort of unforeseen final state existed, that state also would
have! been reached. If it were capable of any halting or stability of
any being, it would only have possessed this capability of becoming
stable for one instant in its development; and again becoming would
have been at an end for ages, and with it all thinking and all
"spirit." The fact of "intellects" being in astate of developmentproves that the universe can have no goal, nofinal state, and is
incapable of being. But the old habit of thinking of some purpose in
regard to all phenomena, and of thinking of a directing and creating
deity in regard to the universe, is so powerful, that the thinker has
to go to great pains in order to avoid thinking of the very aimlessness
of the world as intended. The idea that the universe intentionally
evades a goal, and even knows artificial means wherewith it prevents
itself from falling into a circular movement, must occur to all those
who would fain attribute to the universe the capacity of eternally
regenerating itself—that is to say, they would fain impose upon a
finite, definite force which is invariable in quantity, like the
universe, the miraculous gift of renewing its forms and its conditionsfor all eternity.Although the universe is no longer a God, it must
still be capable of the divine power of creating and transforming;
it must forbid itself to relapse into any one of its previous forms;
it must not only have the intention, but also the means, of avoiding
any sort of repetition, every second of its existence, even, it must
control every single one of its movements, with the view of avoiding
goals, final states, and repetitions and all the other results of such
an unpardonable and insane method of thought and desire. All this
is nothing more than the old religious mode of thought and desire,
which, in spite of all, longs to believe that in some way or other the
universe resembles the old, beloved, infinite, and infinitely-creative
God—that in some way or other "the old God still lives"—that longing
of Spinoza'swhich is expressed in the words "deus sive natura"
(what he really felt was "natura sive deus"). Which, then, is the
proposition and belief in which the decisive change, the presentpreponderanceof the scientific spirit over the religious and
god-fancying spirit, is best formulated? Ought it not to be: the
universe, as force, must not be thought of as unlimited, because it
cannot be thought of in this way,—we forbid ourselves the conceptinfiniteforce, because it isincompatiblewith the idea of force?
Whence it follows that the universe lacks the power of eternal renewal.1063.The principle of the conservation of energy inevitably involveseternal recurrence.1064.That a state of equilibrium has never been reached, proves that it is
impossible, but in infinite space it must have been reached. Likewise
in spherical space. Theformof space must be the cause of the
eternal movement, and ultimately of all imperfection. That "energy" and
"stability" and "immutability" are contradictory. The measure of energy
(dimensionally) is fixed though it is essentially fluid."That which is timeless" must be refuted, any given moment of energy,
the absolute conditions for a new distribution of all forces are
present, it cannot remain stationary. Change is part ofits essence,
therefore time is as well; by this means, however, the necessity of
change has only been established once more in theory.1065.A certain emperor always bore the fleeting nature of all things in his
mind, in order not to value them too seriously, and to be able to live
quietly in their midst. Conversely, everything seems to me much too
important for it to be so fleeting, I seek an eternity for everything:
ought one to pour the most precious salves and wines into the sea? My
consolation is that everything that has been is eternal: the sea will
wash it up again.1066.The new concept of the universe.The universe exists; it is nothing
that grows into existence and that passes out of existence. Or, better
still, it develops, it passes away, but it never began to develop,
and has never ceased from passing away; itmaintainsitself in both
states. It lives on itself, its excrements are its nourishment.We need not concern ourselves for one instant with the hypothesis of acreatedworld. The concept create is to-day utterly indefinable and
unrealisable; it is but a word which hails from superstitious ages,
nothing can be explained with a word. The last attempt that was made
to conceive of a world thatbeganoccurred quite recently,in many
cases with the help of logical reasoning,—generally, too, as you will
guess, with an ulterior theological motive.Several attempts have been made lately to show that the concept that
"the universe has an infinite past (regressus in infinitum) is
contradictory, it was even demonstrated, it is true, at the price
of confounding the head with the tail. Nothing can prevent me from
calculating backwards from this moment of time, and of saying: "I
shall never reach the end"; just as I can calculate without end in a
forward direction, from the same moment. It is only when I wish to
commit the error—I shall be careful to avoid it—of reconciling this
correct concept of aregressus in infinitumwith the absolutely
unrealisable concept of a finiteprogressusup to the present; only
when I consider the direction (forwards or backwards) as logically
indifferent, that I take hold of the head—this very moment—and think
I hold the tail: this pleasure I leave to you, Mr. Dühring!...I have come across this thought in other thinkers before me, and every
time I found that it was determined by other ulterior motives (chiefly
theological, in favour of acreator spiritus).If the universe were
in any way able to congeal, to dry up, to perish; or if it were capable
of attaining to a state of equilibrium; or if it had any kind of goal
at all which a long lapse of time, immutability, and finality reserved
for it (in short, to speak metaphysically, if becoming could resolve
itself into being or into nonentity), this state ought already to have
been reached.But it has not been reached: it therefore follows.... This is the only
certainty we can grasp, which can serve as a corrective to a host of
cosmic hypotheses possible in themselves. If, for instance, materialism
cannot consistently escape the conclusion of a finite state, which
William Thomson has traced out for it, then materialism is thereby
refuted.If the universe may be conceived as a definite quantity of energy,
as a definite number of centres of energy,—and every other concept
remains indefinite and therefore useless,—it follows therefrom that
the universe must go through a calculable number of combinations in
the great game of chance which constitutes its existence. In infinity,
at some moment or other, every possible combination must once have
been realised; not only this, but it must have been realised an
infinite number of times. And inasmuch as between every one of these
combinations and its next recurrence every other possible combination
would necessarily have been undergone, and since every one of these
combinations would determine the whole series in the same order, a
circular movement of absolutely identical series is thus demonstrated:
the universe is thus shown to be a circular movement which has already
repeated itself an infinite number of times, and which plays its game
for all eternity.—This conception is not simply materialistic; for if
it were this, it would not involve an infinite recurrence of identical
cases, but a finite state. Owing to the fact that the universe has
not reached this finite state, materialismshows itself to be but an
imperfect and provisional hypothesis.1067.And do ye know what "the universe" is to my mind? Shall I show it
to you in my mirror? This universe is a monster of energy, without
beginning or end; a fixed and brazen quantity o; energy which grows
neither bigger nor smaller, which does not consume itself, but only
alters its face; as a whole its bulk is immutable, it is a household
without either losses or gains, but likewise without increase and
without sources of revenue, surrounded by nonentity as by a frontier,
it is nothing vague or wasteful, it does not stretch into infinity;
but it is a definite quantum of energy located in limited space,
and not in space which would be anywhere empty. It is rather energy
everywhere, the play of forces and force-waves, at the same time one
and many, agglomerating here and diminishing there, a sea of forces
storming and raging in itself, for ever changing, for ever rolling
back over in calculable ages to recurrence, with an ebb and flow of
its forms, producing the most complicated things out of the most
simple structures; producing the most ardent, most savage, and most
contradictory things out of the quietest, most rigid, and most frozen
material, and then returning from multifariousness to uniformity, from
the play of contradictions back into the delight of consonance, saying
yea unto itself, even in this homogeneity of its courses and ages; for
ever blessing itself as something which recurs for all eternity,—a
becoming which knows not satiety, or disgust, or weariness:—this, my
Dionysian world of eternal self-creation, ofeternal self-destruction,
this mysterious world of twofold voluptuousness; this, my "Beyond Good
and Evil" without aim, unless there is an aim in the bliss of the
circle, without will, unless a ring must by nature keep goodwill to
itself,—would you have a name for my world? Asolutionof all your
riddles? Do ye also want a light, ye most concealed, strongest and
most undaunted men of the blackest midnight?—This world is the Will
to Power—and nothing else!And even ye yourselves are this will to
power—and nothing besides!