[1]Junker-Philosophie.The landed proprietors constitute
the dominating class in Prussia, and it is from this class that all
officers and higher officials are drawn. TheKreuz-Zeitungis the
organ of the Junker party.—TR."THE BIRTH Of TRAGEDY"1In order to be fair to theBirth of Tragedy(1872) it is necessary
to forget a few things. It created a sensation and even fascinated by
means of its mistakes—by means of its application to Wagnerism, as
if the latter were the sign of an ascending tendency. On that account
alone, this treatise was an event in Wagner's life: thenceforward
great hopes surrounded the name of Wagner. Even to this day, people
remind me, sometimes in the middle ofParsifal,that it rests on
my conscience if the opinion, that this movement is of great value
to culture, at length became prevalent I have often seen the book
quoted as "The Second Birth of Tragedy from the Spirit of Music":
people had ears only for new formulæ for Wagner's art, his object
and his mission—and in this way the real hidden value of the book
was overlooked. "Hellenism and Pessimism"—this would have been a
less equivocal title, seeing that the book contains the first attempt
at showing how the Greeks succeeded in disposing: of pessimism—in
what manner they overcame it.... Tragedy itself is the proof of
the fact that the Greeks were not pessimists: Schopenhauer blundered
here as he blundered in everything else.—Regarded impartially,The Birth of Tragedyis a book quite strange to its age: no one
would dream that it was begun in the thunder of the battle of Wörth.
I thought out these problems on cold September nights beneath the
walls of Metz, in the midst of my duties as nurse to the wounded; it
would be easier to think that it was written fifty years earlier. Its
attitude towards politics is one of indifference,—"un-German,"[1]as people would say to-day,—it smells offensively of Hegel; only in
one or two formulæ is it infected with the bitter odour of corpses
which is peculiar to Schopenhauer. An idea—the antagonism of the two
concepts Dionysian and Apollonian—is translated into metaphysics;
history itself is depicted as the development of this idea; in tragedy
this antithesis has become unity; from this standpoint things which
theretofore had never been face to face are suddenly confronted, and
understood and illuminated by each other.... Opera and revolution,
for instance.... The two decisive innovations in the book are, first,
the comprehension of the Dionysian phenomenon among the Greeks—it
provides the first psychological analysis of this phenomenon, and
sees in it the single root of all Greek art; and, secondly, the
comprehension ofSocraticism—Socrates being presented for the first
time as the instrument of Greek dissolution, as a typical decadent.
"Reason"versusInstinct. "Reason" at any cost, as a dangerous,
life-undermining force. The whole book is profoundly and politely
silent concerning Christianity: the latter is neither Apollonian nor
Dionysian; it denies all æsthetic values, which are the only values
thatThe Birth of Tragedyrecognises. Christianity is most profoundly
nihilistic, whereas in the Dionysian symbol, the most extreme limits of
a yea-saying attitude to life are attained. In one part of the book the
Christian priesthood is referred to as a "perfidious order of goblins,"
as "subterraneans."2This start of mine was remarkable beyond measure. As a confirmation
of my inmost personal experience I had discovered the only example
of this fact that history possesses,—with this I was the first
to understand the amazing Dionysian phenomenon. At the same time, by
recognising Socrates as a decadent, I proved most conclusively that
the certainty of my psychological grasp of things ran very little risk
at the hands of any sort of moral idiosyncrasy: to regard morality
itself as a symptom of degeneration is an innovation, a unique event
of the first order in the history of knowledge. How high I had soared
above the pitifully foolish gabble about Optimism and Pessimism with
my two new doctrines! I was the first to see the actual contrast: the
degenerate instinct which turns upon life with a subterranean lust
of vengeance (Christianity,Schopenhauer's philosophy, and in
some respects too even Plato's philosophy—in short, the whole
of idealism in its typical forms), as opposed to a formula of the
highest yea-saying to life, born of an abundance and a superabundance
of life—a I yea-saying free from all reserve, applying even to
suffering, and guilt, and all that is questionable and strange in
existence.... This last, most joyous, most exuberant and exultant
yea to life, is not only the highest, but also the profoundest
conception, and one which is most strictly confirmed and supported by
truth and science. Nothing that exists must be suppressed, nothing
can be dispensed with. Those aspects of life which Christians and
other Nihilists reject, belong to an incalculably higher order in the
hierarchy of values, than that which the instinct of degeneration calls
good, andmaycall good. In order to understand this, a certain
courage is necessary, and, as a prerequisite of this, a certain
superfluity of strength: for a man can approach only as near to truth
as he has the courage to advance—that is to say, everything
depends strictly upon the measure of his strength. Knowledge, and the
affirmation of reality, are just as necessary to the strong man as
cowardice, the flight from reality—in fact, the "ideal"—are
necessary to the weak inspired by weakness.... These people are not at
liberty to "know,"—decadents stand in need of lies,—it is
one of their self-preservative measures. He who not only understands
the word "Dionysian," but understandshimselfin that term, does
not require any refutation of Plato, or of Christianity, or of
Schopenhauer—for his nosescents decomposition.3The extent to which I had by means of these doctrines discovered the
idea of "tragedy," the ultimate explanation of what the psychology of
tragedy is, I discussed finally inThe Twilight of the Idols(Aph.
5, part 10).... "The saying of yea to life, and even to its weirdest
and most difficult problems: the will to life rejoicing at its own
infinite vitality in the sacrifice of its highest types—that is what I
called Dionysian, that is what I meant as the bridge to the psychology
of the tragic poet. Not to cast out terror and pity, or to purge one's
self of dangerous passion by discharging it with vehemence,—this was
Aristotle's[2]misunderstanding of it,—but to be far beyond terror
and pity and to be the eternal lust of Becoming itself—that lust
which also involves the joy of destruction." ... In this sense I have
the right to regard myself as the firsttragic philosopher—that is
to say, the most extreme antithesis and antipodes of a pessimistic
philosopher. Before my time no such thing existed as this translation
of the Dionysian phenomenon into philosophic emotion: tragic wisdom was
lacking; in vain have I sought for signs of it even among the great
Greeks in philosophy—those belonging to the two centuries before
Socrates. I still remained a little doubtful about Heraclitus, in whose
presence, alone, I felt warmer and more at ease than anywhere else.
The yea-saying to the impermanence and annihilation of things, which
is the decisive feature of a Dionysianphilosophy; the yea-saying to
contradiction and war, the postulation of Becoming, together with the
radical rejection even of the conceptBeing— in all these things, at
all events, I must recognise him who has come nearest to me in thought
hither to. The doctrine of the "Eternal Recurrence"—that is to say,
of the absolute and eternal repetition of all things in periodical
cycles—this doctrine of Zarathustra's might, it is true, have been
taught before. In any case, the Stoics, who derived nearly all their
fundamental ideas from Heraclitus, show traces of it.A tremendous hope finds expression in this work. After all, I have
absolutely no reason to renounce the hope for a Dionysian future of
music. Let us look a century ahead, and let us suppose that my attempt
to destroy two millenniums of hostility to Nature and of the violation
of humanity be crowned with success That new party of life-advocates,
which will undertake the greatest of all tasks, the elevation and
perfection of mankind, as well as the relentless destruction of all
degenerate and parasitical elements, will make thatsuperabundance
of lifeon earth once more possible, out of which the Dionysian
state will perforce arise again. I promise the advent of a tragic
age: the highest art in the saying of yea to life, "tragedy," will be
born again when mankind has the knowledge of the hardest, but most
necessary of wars, behind it, without, however, suffering from that
knowledge.... A psychologist might add that what I heard in Wagnerianmusic in my youth and early manhood had nothing whatsoever to do with
Wagner; that when I described Dionysian music, I described merely
whatIpersonally had heard—that I was compelled instinctively to
translate and transfigure everything into the new spirit which filled
my breast. A proof of this, and as strong a proof as you could have,
is my essay,Wagner in Bayreuth: in all its decisive psychological
passages I am the only person concerned—without any hesitation you may
read my name or the word "Zarathustra" wherever the text contains the
name of Wagner. The whole panorama of thedithyrambicartist is the
representation of the already existing author ofZarathustra,and
it is drawn with an abysmal depth which does not even once come into
contact with the real Wagner. Wagner himself had a notion of the truth;
he did not recognise himself in the essay.—In this way, "the idea of
Bayreuth" was changed into something which to those who are acquainted
with myZarathustrawill be no riddle—that is to say, into the
Great Noon when the highest of the elect will consecrate themselves
for the greatest of all duties—who knows? the vision of a feast which
I may live to see.... The pathos of the first few pages is universal
history; the look which is discussed on page 105[3]of the book, is the
actual look ofZarathustra;Wagner, Bayreuth, the whole of this petty
German wretchedness, is a cloud upon which an infinite Fata Morgana
of the future is reflected. Even from thepsychological standpoint,
all the decisive traits in my character are introduced into Wagner's
nature—the juxtaposition of the most brilliant and most fatal forces,
a Will to Power such as no man has ever possessed—inexorable bravery
in matters spiritual, an unlimited power of learning unaccompanied by
depressed powers for action. Everything in this essay is a prophecy:
the proximity of the resurrection of the Greek spirit, the need of men
who will be counter-Alexanders, who will once more tie the Gordian knot
of Greek culture, after it has been cut. Listen to the world-historic
accent with which the concept "sense for the tragic" is introduced
on page 180: there are little else but world-historic accents in
this essay. This is the strangest kind of "objectivity" that ever
existed: my absolute certainty in regard to what Iam,projected
itself into any chance reality—truth about myself was voiced from out
appalling depths. On pages 174 and 175 the style ofZarathustrais
described and foretold with incisive certainty, and no more magnificent
expression will ever be found than that on pages 144-147 for the event
for whichZarathustrastands—that prodigious act of the purification
and consecration of mankind.[1]Those Germans who, like Nietzsche or Goethe, recognised
that politics constituted a danger to culture, and who appreciated the
literature of maturer cultures, such as that of France, are calledun-deutsch(un-German) by Imperialistic Germans.—Tr.[2]Aristotle'sPoetics, c. vi.—Tr.[3]This number and those which follow refer toThoughts out
of Season,Part I. in this edition of Nietzsche's Works.—TR."THOUGHTS OUT OF SEASON"1The four essays composing theThoughts out of Seasonare thoroughly
warlike in tone. They prove that I was no mere dreamer, that I delightin drawing the sword—and perhaps, also, that my wrist is dangerously
supple. The first onslaught (1873) was directed against German culture,
upon which I looked down even at that time with unmitigated contempt
Without either sense, substance, or goal, it was simply "public
opinion." There could be no more dangerous misunderstanding than to
suppose that Germany's success at arms proved anything in favour of
German culture—and still less the triumph of this culture; over
that of France. The second essay (1874) brings to light that which
is dangerous, that which corrodes and poisons life in our manner of
pursuing scientific study: Life is diseased, thanks to this dehumanised
piece of clockwork and mechanism, thanks to the "impersonality" of
the workman, 1 and the false economy of the "division of labour." The
object, which is culture, is lost sight of: modern scientific activity
as a means thereto simply produces barbarism. In this treatise, the
"historical sense," of which this century is so proud, is for the first
time recognised as sickness, as a typical symptom of decay. In the
third and fourth essays, a sign-post is set up pointing to a higher
concept of culture, to a re-establishment of the notion "culture";
and two pictures of the hardest self-love and self-discipline are
presented, two essentially un-modern types, full of the most sovereign
contempt for all that which lay around them and was called "Empire,"
"Culture," "Christianity," "Bismarck," and "Success,"—these two types
were Schopenhauer and Wagner,or,in a word, Nietzsche....2Of these four attacks, the first met with extraordinary success. The
stir which it created was in every way gorgeous. I had put my finger
on the vulnerable spot of a triumphant nation—I had told it that its
victory was not a red-letter day for culture, but, perhaps, something
very different. The reply rang out from all sides, and certainly not
only from old friends of David Strauss, whom I had made ridiculous
as the type of a German Philistine of Culture and a man of smug
self-content—in short, as the author of that suburban gospel of his,
calledThe Old and the New Faith(the term "Philistine of Culture"
passed into the current language of Germany after the appearance of my
book). These old friends, whose vanity as Würtembergians and Swabians
I had deeply wounded in regarding their unique animal, their bird
of Paradise, as a trifle comic, replied to me as ingenuously and as
grossly as I could have wished. The Prussian replies were smarter; they
contained more "Prussian blue." The most disreputable attitude was
assumed by a Leipzig paper, the egregiousGrentzboten; and it cost me
some pains to prevent my indignant friends in Bâle from taking action
against it. Only a few old gentlemen decided in my favour, and for
very diverse and sometimes unaccountable reasons. Among them was one,
Ewald of Göttingen, who made it clear that my attack on Strauss had
been deadly. There was also the Hegelian, Bruno Bauer, who from that
time became one of my most attentive readers. In his later years he
liked to refer tome, when, for instance, he wanted to give Herr von
Treitschke, the Prussian Historiographer, a hint as to where he could
obtain information about the notion "Culture," of which he (Herr von
T.) had completely lost sight. The weightiest and longest notice of my
book and its author appeared in Würzburg, and was written by Professor
Hoffmann, an old pupil of the philosopher von Baader. The essays made
him foresee a great future for me, namely, that of bringing about a
sort of crisis and decisive turning-point in the problem of atheism,
of which he recognised in me the most instinctive and most radical
advocate. It was atheism that had drawn me to Schopenhauer. The review
which received by far the most attention, and which excited the most
bitterness, was an extraordinarily powerful and plucky appreciation of
my work by Carl Hillebrand, a man who was usually so mild, and the lasthumaneGerman who knew how to wield a pen. The article appeared in
theAugsburg Gazette,and it can be read to-day, couched in rather
more cautious language, among his collected essays. In it my work was
referred to as an event, as a decisive turning-point, as the first sign
of an awakening, as an excellent symptom, and as an actual revival
of German earnestness and of German passion in things spiritual.
Hillebrand could speak only in the terms of the highest respect, of
the form of my book, of its consummate taste, of its perfect tact in
discriminating between persons and causes: he characterised it as the
best polemical work in the German language,—the best performance in
the art of polemics, which forGermans is so dangerous and so strongly
to be deprecated. Besides confirming my standpoint, he laid even
greater stress upon what I had dared to say about the deterioration of
language in Germany (nowadays writers assume the airs of Purists[1]and can no longer even construct a sentence); sharing my contempt for
the literary stars of this nation, he concluded by expressing his
admiration for my courage—that "greatest courage of all which places
the very favourites of the people in the dock." ... The after-effects
of this essay of mine proved invaluable to me in my life. No one has
ever tried to meddle with me since. People are silent. In Germany
I am treated with gloomy caution: for years I have rejoiced in the
privilege of such absolute freedom of speech, as no one nowadays,
least of all in the "Empire," has enough liberty to claim. My paradise
is "in the shadow of my sword." At bottom all I had done was to put
one of Stendhal's maxims into practice: he advises one to make one's
entrance into society by means of a duel. And how well I had chosen my
opponent!—the foremost free-thinker of Germany. As a matter of fact,
quite a novel kind of freethought found its expression in this way:
up to the present nothing has been more strange and more foreign to my
blood than the whole of that European and American species known aslitres penseurs.Incorrigible blockheads and clowns of "modern ideas"
that they are, I feel much more profoundly at variance with them than
with any one of their adversaries. They also wish to "improve" mankind,
after their own fashion—that is to say, in their own image; against
that which I stand for and desire, they would wage an implacable war,
if only they understood it; the whole gang of them still believe in an
"ideal." ... I am the firstImmoralist.3I should not like to say that the last two essays in theThoughts
out of Season,associated with the names of Schopenhauer and Wagner
respectively, serve any special purpose in throwing light upon these
two cases, or in formulating their psychological problems. This of
course does not apply to a few details. Thus, for instance, in the
second of the two essays, with a profound certainty of instinct I
already characterised the elementary factor in Wagner's nature as a
theatrical talent which in all his means and inspirations only draws
its final conclusions. At bottom, my desire in this essay was to do
something very different from writing psychology: an unprecedented
educational problem, a new understanding of self-discipline and
self-defence carried to the point of hardness, a road to greatness
and to world-historic duties, yearnedto find expression. Roughly
speaking, I seized two famous and, theretofore, completely undefined
types by the forelock, after the manner in which one seizes
opportunities, simply in order to speak my mind on certain questions,
in order to have a few more formulas, signs, and means of expression
at my disposal. Indeed I actually suggest this, with most unearthly
sagacity, on page 183 ofSchopenhauer as Educator.Plato made use
of Socrates in the same way—that is to say, as a cipher for Plato.
Now that, from some distance, I can look back upon the conditions of
which these essays are the testimony, I would be loth to deny that they
refer simply to me. The essayWagner in Bayreuthis a vision of my
own future; on the other hand, my most secret history, my development,
is written down inSchopenhauer as Educator.But, above all, thevowI made I What I am to-day, the place I now hold—at a height from
which I speak no longer with words but with thunderbolts!—oh, how
far I was from all this in those days! But I saw the land—I did not
deceive myself for one moment as to the way, the sea, the danger—andsuccess! The great calm in promising, this happy prospect of a future
which must not remain only a promise!—In this book every word has
been lived, profoundly and intimately; the most painful things are not
lacking in it; it contains words which are positively running with
blood. But a wind of great freedom blows over the whole; even its
wounds do not constitute an objection. As to what I understand by being
a philosopher,—that is to say, a terrible explosive in the presence
ofwhich everything is in danger; as to how I sever my idea of the
philosopher by miles from that other idea of him which includes even a
Kant, not to speak of the academic "ruminators" and other professors of
philosophy,—concerning all these things this essay provides invaluable
information, even granting that at bottom, it is not "Schopenhauer as
Educator" but "Nietzsche as Educator," who speaks his sentiments in
it. Considering that, in those days, my trade was that of a scholar,
and perhaps, also, that I understood my trade, the piece of austere
scholar psychology which suddenly makes its appearance in this essay is
not without importance: it expresses the feeling of distance, and my
profound certainty regarding what was my real life-task, and what were
merely means, intervals, and accessory work to me. My wisdom consists
in my having been many things, and in many places, in order to become
one thing—in order to be able to attain to one thing. It was part of
my fate to be a scholar for a while.[1]The Purists constitute a definite body in Germany, which
is called theDeutscher Sprach-Verein.Their object is to banish
every foreign word from the language, and they carry this process of
ostracism even into the domain of the menu, where their efforts at
rendering the meaning of French dishes are extremely comical. Strange
to say, their principal organ, and their other publications, are by
no means free either from solecisms or faults of style, and it is
doubtless to this curious anomaly that Nietzsche here refers.—TR."HUMAN, ALL-TOO-HUMAN"1Human all-too-Human,with its two sequels, is the memorial of a
crisis. It is called a book for free spirits: almost every sentence in
it is the expression of a triumph—by means of it I purged myself of
everything in me which was foreign to my nature. Idealism is foreign
to me: the title of thebook means: "Where ye see ideal things I
see—human, alas! all-too-human things!" ... I know men better. The
word "free spirit" in this book must not be understood as anything
else than a spirit that has become free, that has once more taken
possession of itself. My tone, the pitch of my voice, has completely
changed; the book will be thought clever, cool, and at times both
hard and scornful. A certain spirituality, of noble taste, seems to
be ever struggling to dominate a passionate torrent at its feet. In
this respect there is some sense in the fact that it was the hundredth
anniversary of Voltaire's death that served, so to speak, as an excuse
for the publication of the book as early as 1878. For Voltaire, as the
opposite of every one who wrote after him, was above all a grandee of
the intellect; precisely what I am also. The name of Voltaire on one
of my writings—that was verily a step forward—in my direction....
Looking into this book a little more closely, you perceive a pitiless
spirit who knows all the secret hiding-places in which ideals are wont
to skulk—where they find their dungeons, and, as it were, their last
refuge. With a torch in my hand, the light of which is not by any
means a flickering one, I illuminate this nether world with beams that
cut like blades. It is war, but war without powder and smoke, without
warlike attitudes, without pathos and contorted limbs—all these things
would still be "idealism." One error after the other is quietly laid
upon ice; the ideal is not refuted,—it freezes. Here, for instance,
"genius" freezes; round the corner the "saint" freezes; under a thick
icicle the "hero" freezes; and in the end "faith"itself freezes.
So-called "conviction" and also "pity" are considerably cooled—and
almost everywhere the "thing in itself" is freezing to death.2This book was begun during the first musical festival at Bayreuth; a
feeling of profound strangeness towards everything that surrounded
me there, is one of its first conditions. He who has any notion of
the visions which even at that time had flitted across my path, will
be able to guess what I felt when one day I came to my senses in
Bayreuth. It was just as if I had been dreaming. Where on earth was I?
I recognised nothing that I saw; I scarcely recognised Wagner. It was
in vain that I called up reminiscences. Tribschen—remote island of
bliss: not the shadow of a resemblance! The incomparable days devoted
to the laying of the first stone, the small group of the initiated
who celebrated them, and who were far from lacking fingers for the
handling of delicate things: not the shadow of a resemblance!What
had happened?—Wagner had been translated into German! The Wagnerite
had become master of Wagner!—Germanart! the German master! German
beer!... We who know only too well the kind of refined artists and
cosmopolitanism in taste, to which alone Wagner's art can appeal, were
beside ourselves at the sight of Wagner bedecked with German virtues.
I think I know the Wagnerite, I have experienced three generations
of them, from Brendel of blessed memory, who confoundedWagner with
Hegel, to the "idealists" of theBayreuth Gazette,who confound
Wagner with themselves,—I have been the recipient of every kind of
confession about Wagner, from "beautiful souls." My kingdom for just
one intelligent word I—In very truth, a blood-curdling company! Nohl,
Pohl, andKohl[1]and others of their kidney to infinity! There
was not a single abortion that was lacking among them—no, not even
the anti-Semite.—Poor Wagner! Into whose hands had he fallen? If
only he had gone into a herd of swine! But among Germans! Some day,
for the edification of posterity, one ought really to have a genuine
Bayreuthian stuffed, or, better still, preserved in spirit,—for
it is precisely spirit that is lacking in this quarter,—with this
inscription at the foot of the jar: "A sample of the spirit whereon
the 'German Empire' was founded." ... But enough! In the middle of
the festivities I suddenly packed my trunk and left the place for a
few weeks, despite the fact that a charming Parisian lady sought to
comfort me; I excused myself to Wagner simply by means of a fatalistic
telegram. In a little spot called Klingenbrunn, deeply buried in the
recesses of the Bohmerwald, I carried my melancholy and my contempt of
Germans about with me like an illness—and, from time to time, under
the general title of "The Plough-share," I wrote a sentence or two down
in my note-book, nothing but severe psychological stuff, whichit is
possible may have found its way intoHuman, all-too-Human.3That which had taken place in me, then, was not only a breach with
Wagner—I was suffering from a general aberration of my instincts,
of which a mere isolated blunder, whether it were Wagner or my
professorship at Bâle, was nothing more than a symptom. I was seized
with a fit of impatience with myself; I saw that it was high time that
I should turn my thoughts upon my own lot. In a trice I realised, with
appalling clearness, how much time had already been squandered—how
futile and how senseless my whole existence as a philologist appeared
by the side of my life-task. I was ashamed of this false modesty....
Ten years were behind me, during which, to tell the truth, the
nourishment of my spirit had been at a standstill, during which I had
added not a single useful fragment to my knowledge, and had forgotten
countless things in the pursuit of a hotch-potch of dry-as-dust
scholarship. To crawl with meticulous care and short-sighted eyes
through old Greek metricians—that is what I had come to!... Moved to
pity I saw myself quite thin, quite emaciated: realities were only too
plainly absent from my stock of knowledge, and what the "idealities"
were worth the devil alone knew! A positively burning thirst overcame
me: and from that time forward I have done literally nothing else than
study physiology, medicine, and natural science—I even returned to
the actual study of history only when my life-task compelled me to. It
was at that time, too, that I first divined the relationbetween an
instinctively repulsive occupation, a so-called vocation, which is the
last thing to which one is "called" and that need of lulling a feeling
of emptiness and hunger, by means of an art which is a narcotic—by
means of Wagner's art, for instance. After looking carefully about
me, I have discovered that a large number of young men are all in the
same state of distress: one kind of unnatural practice perforce leads
to another. In Germany, or rather, to avoid all ambiguity, in the
Empire,[2]only too many are condemned to determine their choice too
soon, and then to pine away beneath a burden that they can no longer
throw off.... Such creatures crave for Wagner as for an opiate,—they
are thus able to forget themselves, to be rid of themselves for a
moment.... What am I saying!—for five or six hours.4At this time my instincts turned resolutely against any further
yielding or following on my part, and any further misunderstanding
of myself. Every kind of life, the most unfavourable circumstances,
illness, poverty—anything seemed to me preferable to that undignified
"selfishness" into which I had fallen; in the first place, thanks to my
ignorance and youth, and in which I had afterwards remained owing to
laziness—the so-called "sense of duty." At this juncture there came to
my help, in a waythat I cannot sufficiently admire, and precisely at
the right time, that evil heritage which I derive from my father's side
of the family, and which, at bottom, is no more than a predisposition
to die young. Illness slowly liberated me from the toils, it spared me
any sort of sudden breach, any sort of violent and offensive step. At
that time I lost not a particle of the good will of others, but rather
added to my store. Illness likewise gave me the right completely to
reverse my mode of life; it not only allowed, it actually commanded,
me to forget; it bestowed upon me the necessity of lying still, of
having leisure, of waiting, and of exercising patience.... But all
this means thinking!... The state of my eyes alone put an end to all
book-wormishness, or, in plain English—philology: I was thus delivered
from books; for years I ceased from reading, and this was the greatest
boon I ever conferred upon myself! That nethermost self, which was,
as it were, entombed, and which had grown dumb because it had been
forced to listen perpetually to other selves (for that is what reading
means!), slowly awakened; at first it was shy and doubtful, but at
last itspoke againNever have I rejoiced more over my condition
than during the sickest and most painful moments of my life. You have
only to examineThe Dawn of Day,or, perhaps,The Wanderer and
his Shadow,[3]in order to understand what this "return to myself"
actually meant: in itself it was the highest kind of recovery!... My
cure was simply the result of it.5Human, all-too-Human,this monument of a course of vigorous
self-discipline, by means of which I put an abrupt end to all the
"Superior Bunkum," "Idealism," "Beautiful Feelings," and other
effeminacies that had percolated into my being, was written principally
in Sorrento; it was finished and given definite shape during a winter
at Bâle, under conditions far less favourable than those in Sorrento.
Truth to tell, it was Peter Gast, at that time a student at the
University of Bâle, and a devoted friend of mine, who was responsible
for the book. With my head wrapped in bandages, and extremely painful,
I dictated while he wrote and corrected as he went along—to be
accurate, he was the real composer, whereas I was only the author.
When the completed book ultimately reached me,—to the great surprise
of the serious invalid I then was,—I sent, among others, two copies
to Bayreuth. Thanks to a miraculous flash of intelligence on the part
of chance, there reached me precisely at the same time a splendid copy
of theParsifaltext, with the following inscription from Wagner's
pen: "To his dear friend Friedrich Nietzsche, from Richard Wagner,
Ecclesiastical Councillor." At this crossing of the two books I seemed
to hear an ominous note. Did it not sound as if two swords had crossed?
At all events we both felt this was so, for each of us remained silent.
At about this time the first Bayreuth Pamphlets appeared: and I then
understood the move on my part for whichit was high time. Incredible!
Wagner had become pious.6My attitude to myself at that time (1876), and the unearthly certitude
with which I grasped my life-task and all its world-historic
consequences, is well revealed throughout the book, but more
particularly in one very significant passage, despite the fact that,
with my instinctive cunning, I once more circumvented the use of
the little word "I,"—not however, this time, in order to shed
world-historic glory on the names of Schopenhauer and Wagner, but on
that of another of my friends, the excellent Dr. Paul Rée—fortunately
much too acute a creature to be deceived—others were less subtle.
Among my readers I have a number of hopeless people, the typical
German professor for instance, who can always be recognised from the
fact that, judging from the passage in question, he feels compelled to
regard the whole book as a sort of superior Realism. As a matter of
fact it contradicts five or six of my friend's utterances: only read
the introduction toThe Genealogy of Moralson this question.—The
passage above referred to reads: "What, after all, is the principal
axiom to which the boldest and coldest thinker, the author of the
book "On the Origin of Moral Sensations" (read Nietzsche, the first
Immoralist), "has attained by means of his incisive and decisive
analysis of human actions? 'The moral man,' he says is no nearer to the
intelligible (metaphysical) world than is the physical man, for there
is no intelligibleworld.' This theory, hardened and sharpened under
the hammer-blow of historical knowledge" (readThe Transvaluation
of all Values), "may some time or other, perhaps in some future
period,—1890!—serve as the axe which is applied to the root of the
'metaphysical need' of man,—whether more as a blessing than a curse to
the general welfare it is not easy to say; but in any case as a theory
with the most important consequences, at once fruitful and terrible,
and looking into the world with that Janus-face which all great
knowledge possesses."[4][1]Nohl and Pohl were both writers on music; Kohl, however,
which literally means cabbage, is a slang expression, denoting superior
nonsense.—TR.[2]Needless to say, Nietzsche distinguishes between
Bismarckian Germany and that other Germany—Austria, Switzerland, and
the Baltic Provinces—where the German language is also spoken.—TR.[3]Human, all-too-Human,Part II. in this edition.—TR.[4]Human, all-too-Human,vol. i. Aph. 37."THE DAWN OF DAY:THOUGHTS ABOUT MORALITY AS A PREJUDICE"1With this book I open my campaign against morality. Not that it is at
all redolent of powder—you will find quite other and much nicer smells
in it, provided that you have any keenness in your nostrils. There
is nothing either of light or of heavy artillery in its composition,
and if its general end be a negative one, its means are not so—means
out of which the end follows like a logical conclusion,notlike a
cannon-shot. And if the reader takes leave of this book with a feeling
of timid caution in regard to everything which has hitherto been
honoured and even worshipped under the name of morality, it does not
alter the fact that there is not one negativeword, not one attack,
and not one single piece of malice in the whole work—on the contrary,
it lies in the sunshine, smooth and happy, like a marine animal,
basking in the sun between two rocks. For, after all, I was this marine
animal: almost every sentence in the book was thought out, or rathercaught,among that medley of rocks in the neighbourhood of Genoa,
where I lived quite alone, and exchanged secrets with the ocean. Even
to this day, when by chance I happen to turn over the leaves of this
book, almost every sentence seems to me like a hook by means of which I
draw something incomparable out of the depths; its whole skin quivers
with delicate shudders of recollection. This book is conspicuous for no
little art in gently catching things which whisk rapidly and silently
away, moments which I call godlike lizards—not with the cruelty of
that young Greek god who simply transfixed the poor little beast;
but nevertheless with something pointed—with a pen. "There are so
many dawns which have not yet shed their light"—this Indian maxim is
written over the doorway of this book. Where does its author seek that
new morning, that delicate red, as yet undiscovered, with which another
day—ah! a whole series of days, a whole world of new days!—will
begin? In theTransvaluation of all Values,in an emancipation from
all moral values, in a saying of yea, and in an attitude of trust, to
all that which hitherto has been forbidden, despised, and damned. This
yea-saying book projects its light, its love, its tenderness, over all
evil things, it restores to them their soul, their clear conscience,
and their superior right and privilege to exist on earth.Morality is
not assailed, it simply ceases to be considered. This book closes with
the word "or?"—it is the only book which closes with an "or?".2My life-task is to prepare for humanity one supreme moment in which it
can come to its senses, a Great Noon in which it will turn its gaze
backwards and forwards, in which it will step from under the yoke
of accident and of priests, and for the first time set the question
of the Why and Wherefore of humanity as a whole—this life-task
naturally follows out of the conviction that mankind doesnotget
on the right road of its own accord, that it is by no means divinely
ruled, but rather that it is precisely under the cover of its most
holy valuations that the instinct of negation, of corruption, and of
degeneration has held such a seductive sway. The question concerning
the origin of moral valuations is therefore a matter of the highest
importance to me because it determines the future of mankind. The
demand made upon us to believe that everything is really in the best
hands, that a certain book, the Bible, gives us the definite and
comforting assurance that there is a Providence that wisely rules the
fate of man,—when translated back into reality amounts simply to this,
namely, the will to stifle the truth which maintains the reverse of
all this, which is that hitherto man has been in theworst possiblehands, and that he has been governed by the physiologically botched,
the men of cunning and burning revengefulness, and the so-called
"saints"—those slanderers of the world and traducers of humanity.
The definite proof of the fact that the priest (including the priest
in disguise, the philosopher) has become master, not only within a
certain limited religious community, but everywhere, and that the
morality of decadence, the will to nonentity, has become moralityper se,is to be found in this: that altruism is now an absolute
value, and egoism is regarded with hostility everywhere. He who
disagrees with me on this point, I regard as infected. But all the
world disagrees with me. To a physiologist a like antagonism between
values admits of no doubt. If the most insignificant organ within the
body neglects, however slightly, to assert with absolute certainty its
self-preservative powers, its recuperative claims, and its egoism, the
whole system degenerates. The physiologist insists upon the removal of
degenerated parts, he denies all fellow-feeling for such parts, and
has not the smallest feeling of pity for them. But the desire of the
priest is precisely the degeneration of the whole of mankind; hence his
preservation of that which is degenerate—this is what his dominion
costs humanity. What meaning have those lying concepts, those handmaids
of morality, "Soul," "Spirit," "Free will," "God," if their aim is not
the physiological ruin of mankind? When earnestness is diverted from
the instincts that aim at self-preservation and an increase of bodily
energy,i.e.at anincrease of life; when anæmia is raised to an
ideal and the contempt of the body is construed as "the salvation of
the soul," what is all this if it is not a recipe for decadence? Loss
of ballast, resistanceoffered to natural instincts, selflessness,
in fact—this is what has hitherto been known as morality. WithThe
Dawn of DayI first engaged in a struggle against the morality of
self-renunciation."JOYFUL WISDOM: LA GAYA SCIENZA"1Dawn of Dayis a yea-saying book, profound, but clear and kindly. The
same applies once more and in the highest degree toLa Gaya Scienza:in almost every sentence of this book, profundity and playfulness go
gently hand in hand. A verse which expresses my gratitude for the most
wonderful month of January which I have ever lived—the whole book is a
gift—sufficiently reveals the abysmal depths from which "wisdom" has
here become joyful."Thou who with cleaving fiery lancesThe stream of my soul from its ice dost free,Till with a rush and a roar it advancesTo enter with glorious hoping the sea:Brighter to see and purer ever,Free in the bonds of thy sweet constraint,—So it praises thy wondrous endeavour,January, thou beauteous saint!"[1]Who can be in any doubt as to what "glorious hoping" means here, when
he has realised thediamond beauty of the first of Zarathustra's
words as they appear in a glow of light at the close of the fourth
book? Or when he reads the granite sentences at the end of the third
book, wherein a fate for all times is first given a formula? The songs
of Prince Free-as-a-Bird, which, for the most part, were written in
Sicily, remind me quite forcibly of that Provencal notion of "Gaya
Scienza," of that union ofsinger, knight, and free spirit,which
distinguishes that wonderfully early culture of the Provencals from
all ambiguous cultures. The last poem of all, "To the Mistral,"—an
exuberant dance song in which, if you please, the new spirit dances
freely upon the corpse of morality,—is a perfect Provençalism.