[1]Translated forJoyful Wisdomby Paul V. Cohn.—TR."THUS SPAKE ZARATHUSTRA: A BOOK FOR ALL AND NONE"1I now wish to relate the history ofZarathustra.The fundamental
idea of the work, theEternal Recurrence,the highest formula of
a Yea-saying to life that can ever be attained, was first conceived
in the month of August 1881. I made a note of the idea on a sheet of
paper, with the postscript: "Six thousand feet beyond man and time."
That day I happened to be wandering through the woods alongside of the
Lake of Silvaplana, and I halted not far from Surlei, beside a huge
rock that towered aloft like a pyramid. It was then thatthe thought
struck me. Looking back now, I find that exactly two months before
this inspiration I had an omen of its coming in the form of a sudden
and decisive change in my tastes—more particularly in music. The
whole ofZarathustramight perhaps be classified under the rubric
music. At all events, the essential condition of its production was
a second birth within me of the art of hearing. In Recoaro, a small
mountain resort near Vicenza, where I spent the spring of 1881, I and
my friend and maestro, Peter Gast—who was also one who had been born
again, discovered that the phœnix music hovered over us, in lighter
and brighter plumage than it had ever worn before. If, therefore, I
now calculate from that day forward the sudden production of the book,
under the most unlikely circumstances, in February 1883,—the last
part, out of which I quoted a few lines in my preface, was written
precisely in the hallowed hour when Richard Wagner gave up the ghost
in Venice,—I come to the conclusion that the period of gestation
covered eighteen months. This period of exactly eighteen months,
might suggest, at least to Buddhists, that I am in reality a female
elephant The interval was devoted to theGaya Scienza,which contains
hundreds of indications of the proximity of something unparalleled;
for, after all, it shows the beginning ofZarathustra,since it
presentsZarathustra'sfundamental thought in the last aphorism
but one of the fourth book. To this interval also belongs thatHymn
to Life(for a mixed choir and orchestra), the score of which was
published inLeipzig two years ago by E. W. Fritsch, and which gave
perhaps no slight indication of my spiritual state during this year,
in which the essentially yea-saying pathos, which I call the tragic
pathos, completely filled me heart and limb. One day people will sing
it to my memory. The text, let it be well understood, as there is
some misunderstanding abroad on this point, is not by me; it was the
astounding inspiration of a young Russian lady, Miss Lou von Salome,
with whom I was then on friendly terms. He who is in any way able
to make some sense of the last words of the poem, will divine why I
preferred and admired it: there is greatness in them. Pain is not
regarded as an objection to existence: "And if thou hast no bliss now
left to crown me—Lead on! Thou hast thy Sorrow still."Maybe that my music is also great in this passage. (The last note of
the oboe, by the bye, is C sharp, not C. The latter is a misprint.)
During the following winter, I was living on that charmingly peaceful
Gulf of Rapallo, not far from Genoa, which cuts inland between Chiavari
and Cape Porto Fino. My health was not very good; the winter was cold
and exceptionally rainy; and the smallalbergoin which I lived
was so close to the water that at night my sleep was disturbed if
the sea was rough. These circumstances were surely the very reverse
of favourable; and yet, in spite of it all, and as if in proof of my
belief that everything decisive comes to life in defiance of every
obstacle, it was precisely during this winter and in the midst of these
unfavourablecircumstances that myZarathustraoriginated. In the
morning I used to start out in a southerly direction up the glorious
road to Zoagli, which rises up through a forest of pines and gives
one a view far out to sea. In the afternoon, or as often as my health
allowed, I walked round the whole bay from Santa Margherita to beyond
Porto Fino. This spot affected me all the more deeply because it was
so dearly loved by the Emperor Frederick III. In the autumn of 1886 I
chanced to be there again when he was revisiting this small forgotten
world of happiness for the last time. It was on these two roads that
allZarathustracame to me, above all, Zarathustra himself as a
type—I ought rather to say that it was on these walks thathe waylaid
me.2In order to understand this type, you must first be quite clear
concerning its fundamental physiological condition: this condition
is what I callgreat healthiness.In regard to this idea I cannot
make my meaning more plain or more personal than I have done already
in one of the last aphorisms (No. 382) of the fifth book of theGaya
Scienza: "We new, nameless, and unfathomable creatures," so reads
the passage, "we firstlings of a future still unproved—we who have a
new end in view also require new means to that end, that is to say,
a new healthiness, a stronger, keener, tougher, bolder, and merrier
healthiness than any that has existed heretofore. He who longs tofeel in his own soul the whole range of values and aims that have
prevailed on earth until his day, and to sail round all the coasts
of this ideal 'Mediterranean Sea'; who, from the adventures of his
own inmost experience, would fain know how it feels to be a conqueror
and discoverer of the ideal;—as also how it is with the artist, the
saint, the legislator, the sage, the scholar, the man of piety and the
godlike anchorite of yore;—such a man requires one thing above all
for his purpose, and that is,great healthiness—such healthiness as
he not only possesses, but also constantly acquires and must acquire,
because he is continually sacrificing it again, and is compelled to
sacrifice it! And now, therefore, after having been long on the way,
we Argonauts of the ideal, whose pluck is greater than prudence would
allow, and who are often shipwrecked and bruised, but, as I have said,
healthier than people would like to admit, dangerously healthy, and for
ever recovering our health—it would seem as if we had before us, as
a reward for all our toils, a country still undiscovered, the horizon
of which no one has yet seen, a beyond to every country and every
refuge of the ideal that man has ever known, a world so overflowing
with beauty, strangeness, doubt, terror, and divinity, that both our
curiosity and our lust of possession are frantic with eagerness. Alas!
how in the face of such vistas, and with such burning desire in our
conscience and consciousness, could we still be content withthe man
of the present day? This is bad indeed; but, that we should regard
his worthiest aims and hopes with ill-concealed amusement,or perhaps
give them no thought at all, is inevitable. Another ideal now leads
us on, a wonderful, seductive ideal, full of danger, the pursuit of
which we should be loath to urge upon any one, because we are not so
ready to acknowledge any one'sright to it:the ideal of a spirit who
plays ingenuously (that is to say, involuntarily, and as the outcome
of superabundant energy and power) with everything that, hitherto,
has been called holy, good, inviolable, and divine; to whom even the
loftiest thing that the people have with reason made their measure of
value would be no better than a danger, a decay, and an abasement, or
at least a relaxation and temporary forgetfulness of self: the ideal
of a humanly superhuman well-being and goodwill, which often enough
will seem inhuman—as when, for instance, it stands beside all past
earnestness on earth, and all past solemnities in hearing, speech,
tone, look, morality, and duty, as their most lifelike and unconscious
parody—but with which, nevertheless,great earnestnessperhaps alone
begins, the first note of interrogation is affixed, the fate of the
soul changes, the hour hand moves, and tragedy begins."3Has any one at the end of the nineteenth century any distinct notion
of what poets of a stronger age understood by the word inspiration?
If not, I will describe it. If one had the smallest vestige of
superstition left in one, it would hardly be possible completely to
set aside the idea that one is the mereincarnation, mouthpiece, or
medium of an almighty power. The idea of revelation, in the sense
that something which profoundly convulses and upsets one becomes
suddenly visible and audible with indescribable certainty and
accuracy—describes the simple fact. One hears—one does not seek; one
takes—one does not ask who gives: a thought suddenly flashes up like
lightning, it comes with necessity, without faltering—I have never had
any choice in the matter. There is an ecstasy so great that the immense
strain of it is sometimes relaxed by a flood of tears, during which
one's steps now involuntarily rush and anon involuntarily lag. There
is the feeling that one is utterly out of hand, with the very distinct
consciousness of an endless number of fine thrills and titillations
descending to one's very toes;—there is a depth of happiness in which
the most painful and gloomy parts do not act as antitheses to the rest,
but are produced and required as necessary shades of colour in such an
overflow of light. There is an instinct for rhythmic relations which
embraces a whole world of forms (length, the need of a wide-embracing
rhythm, is almost the measure of the force of an inspiration, a sort
of counterpart to its pressure and tension). Everything happens
quite involuntarily, as if in a tempestuous outburst of freedom,
of absoluteness, of power and divinity. The involuntary nature of
the figures and similes is the most remarkable thing; one loses all
perception of what is imagery and metaphor; everything seems to present
itself as the readiest, the truest, and simplest means of expression.
It actually seems, to use one of Zarathustra'sown phrases, as if all
things came to one, and offered themselves as similes. ("Here do all
things come caressingly to thy discourse and flatter thee, for they
would fain ride upon thy back. On every simile thou ridest here unto
every truth. Here fly open unto thee all the speech and word shrines
of the world, here would all existence become speech, here would
all Becoming learn of thee how to speak.") This is my experience of
inspiration. I do not doubt but that I should have to go back thousands
of years before I could find another who could say to me: "It is mine
also!"4For a few weeks afterwards I lay an invalid in Genoa. Then followed
a melancholy spring in Rome, where I only just managed to live—and
this was no easy matter. This city, which is absolutely unsuited to
the poet-author ofZarathustra,and for the choice of which I was
not responsible, made me inordinately miserable. I tried to leave it.
I wanted to go to Aquila—the opposite of Rome in every respect, and
actually founded in a spirit of hostility towards that city, just as
I also shall found a city some day, as a memento of an atheist and
genuine enemy of the Church, a person very closely related to me, the
great Hohenstaufen, the Emperor Frederick II. But Fate lay behind it
all: I had to return again to Rome. In the end I was obliged to be
satisfied with the Piazza Barberini, after I had exerted myself in
vain to find an anti-Christian quarter. I fear that on one occasion,
to avoid badsmells as much as possible, I actually inquired at the
Palazzo del Quirinale whether they could not provide a quiet room for
a philosopher. In a chamber high above the Piazza just mentioned, from
which one obtained a general view of Rome, and could hear the fountains
plashing far below, the loneliest of all songs was composed—"The
Night-Song." About this time I was obsessed by an unspeakably sad
melody, the refrain of which I recognised in the affords, "dead through
immortality," ... In the summer, finding myself once more in the sacred
place where the first thought ofZarathustraflashed like a light
across my mind, I conceived the second part. Ten days sufficed. Neither
for the second, the first, nor the third part, have I required a day
longer. In the ensuing winter, beneath the halcyon sky of Nice, which
then for the first time poured its light into my life, I found the
thirdZarathustra—and came to the end of my task: the whole having
occupied me scarcely a year. Many hidden corners and heights in the
country round about Nice are hallowed for me by moments that I can
never forget. That decisive chapter, entitled "Old and New Tables,"
was composed during the arduous ascent from the station to Eza—that
wonderful Moorish village in the rocks. During those moments when my
creative energy flowed most plentifully, my muscular activity was
always greatest. The body is inspired: let us waive the question of
"soul." I might often have been seen dancing in those days, and I could
then walk for seven or eight hours on end over the hills without a
suggestion of fatigue. I slept well andlaughed a good deal—I was
perfectly robust and patient.5With the exception of these periods of industry lasting ten days, the
years I spent during the production ofZarathustra,and thereafter,
were for me years of unparalleled distress. A man pays dearly for
being immortal: to this end he must die many times over during his
life. There is such a thing as what I call the rancour of greatness:
everything great, whether a work or a deed, once it is completed, turns
immediately against its author. The very fact that he is its author
makes him weak at this time. He can no longer endure his deed. He can
no longer look it full in the face. To have something at one's back
which one could never have willed, something to which the knot of human
destiny is attached—and to be forced thenceforward to bear it on one's
shoulders! Why, it almost crushes one! The rancour of greatness! A
somewhat different experience is the uncanny silence that reigns about
one. Solitude has seven skins which nothing can penetrate. One goes
among men; one greets friends: but these things are only new deserts,
the looks of those one meets no longer bear a greeting. At the best
one encounters a sort of revolt. This feeling of revolt, I suffered,
in varying degrees of intensity, at the hands of almost every one who
came near me; it would seem that nothing inflicts a deeper wound than
suddenly to make one's distance felt. Those noble natures are scarce
whoknow not how to live unless they can revere. A third thing is
the absurd susceptibility of the skin to small pin-pricks, a kind of
helplessness in the presence of all small things. This seems to me a
necessary outcome of the appalling expenditure of all defensive forces,
which is the first condition of everycreativeact, of every act
which proceeds from the most intimate, most secret, and most concealed
recesses of a man's being. The small defensive forces are thus, as it
were, suspended, and no fresh energy reaches them. I even think it
probable that one does not digest so well, that one is less willing
to move, and that one is much too open to sensations of coldness and
suspicion; for, in a large number of cases, suspicion is merely a
blunder in etiology. On one occasion when I felt like this I became
conscious of the proximity of a herd of cows, some time before I could
possibly have seen it with my eyes, simply owing to a return in me of
milder and more humane sentiments:theycommunicated warmth to me....6This work stands alone. Do not let us mention the poets in the
same breath; nothing perhaps has ever been produced out of such a
superabundance of strength. My concept "Dionysian" here became thehighestdeed; compared with it everything that other men have done
seems poor and limited. The fact that a Goethe or a Shakespeare would
not for an instant have known how to take breath in this atmosphere of
passion and of the heights; thefact that by the side of Zarathustra,
Dante is no more than a believer, and not one who firstcreatesthe
truth—that is to say, not a world-ruling spirit, aFate; the fact
that the poets of the Veda were priests and not even fit to unfasten
Zarathustra's sandal—all this is the least of things, and gives no
idea of the distance, of the azure solitude, in which this work dwells.
Zarathustra has an eternal right to say: "I draw around me circles and
holy boundaries. Ever fewer are they that mount with me to ever loftier
heights. I build me a mountain range of ever holier mountains." If all
the spirit and goodness of every great soul were collected together,
the whole could not create a single one of Zarathustra's discourses.
The ladder upon which he rises and descends is of boundless length;
he has seen further, he has willed further, andgonefurther than
any other man. There is contradiction in every word that he utters,
this most yea-saying of all spirits. Through him all contradictions
are bound up into a new unity. The loftiest and the basest powers of
human nature, the sweetest, the lightest, and the most terrible, rush
forth from out one spring with everlasting certainty. Until his coming
no one knew what was height, or depth, and still less what was truth.
There is not a single passage in this revelation of truth which had
already been anticipated and divined by even the greatest among men.
Before Zarathustra there was no wisdom, no probing of the soul, no art
of speech: in his book, the most familiar and most vulgar thing utters
unheard-of words. The sentence quivers with passion. Eloquence has
become music. Forks oflightning are hurled towards futures of which
no one has ever dreamed before. The most powerful use of parables that
has yet existed is poor beside it, and mere child's-play compared with
this return of language to the nature of imagery. See how Zarathustra
goes down from the mountain and speaks the kindest words to every
one! See with what delicate fingers he touches his very adversaries,
the priests, and how he suffers with them from themselves! Here, at
every moment, man is overcome, and the concept "Superman" becomes the
greatest reality,—out of sight, almost far away beneath him, lies
all that which heretofore has been called great in man. The halcyonic
brightness, the light feet, the presence of wickedness and exuberance
throughout, and all that is the essence of the type Zarathustra, was
never dreamt of before as a prerequisite of greatness. In precisely
these limits of space and in this accessibility to opposites
Zarathustra feels himself thehighest of all living things: and when
you hear how he defines this highest, you will give up trying to find
his equal."The soul which hath the longest ladder and can step down deepest,"The vastest soul that can run and stray and rove furthest in its own
domain,"The most necessary soul, that out of desire flingeth itself to chance,"The stable soul that plungeth into Becoming, the possessing soul that
must needs taste of willing and longing,"The soul that flyeth from itself, and over-taketh itself in the widest
circle,"The wisest soul that folly exhorteth most sweetly,"The most self-loving soul, in whom all things have their rise, their
ebb and flow."But this is the very idea of Dionysus. Another consideration leads
to this idea. The psychological problem presented by the type of
Zarathustra is, how can he, who in an unprecedented manner says
no, andactsno, in regard to all that which has been affirmed
hitherto, remain nevertheless a yea-saying spirit? how can he who
bears the heaviest destiny on his shoulders and whose very life-task
is a fatality, yet be the brightest and the most transcendental
of spirits—for Zarathustra is a dancer? how can he who has the
hardest and most terrible grasp of reality, and who has thought the
most "abysmal thoughts," nevertheless avoid conceiving these things
as objections to existence, or even as objections to the eternal
recurrence of existence?—how is it that on the contrary he finds
reasons forbeing himselfthe eternal affirmation of all things, "the
tremendous and unlimited saying of Yea and Amen"?... "Into every abyss
do I bear the benediction of my yea to Life." ... But this, once more,
is precisely the idea of Dionysus.7What language will such a spirit speak, when he speaks unto his soul?
The language of thedithyramb.I am the inventor of the dithyramb.
Hearken unto the manner in which Zarathustra speaks to his soulBefore
Sunrise(iii. 48). Beforemy time such emerald joys and divine
tenderness had found no tongue. Even the profoundest melancholy of
such a Dionysus takes shape as a dithyramb. As an example of this I
take "The Night-Song,"—the immortal plaint of one who, thanks to his
superabundance of light and power, thanks to the sun within him, is
condemned never to love."It is night: now do all gushing springs raise their voices. And my
soul too is a gushing spring."It is night: now only do all lovers burst into song. And my soul too
is the song of a lover."Something unquenched and unquenchable is within me, that would raise
its voice. A craving for love is within me, which itself speaketh the
language of love."Light am I: would that I were night! But this is my loneliness, that I
am begirt with light."Alas, why am I not dark and like unto the night! How joyfully would I
then suck at the breasts of light!"And even you would I bless, ye twinkling starlets and glow-worms on
high! and be blessed in the gifts of your light."But in mine own light do I live, ever back into myself do I drink the
flames I send forth."I know not the happiness of the hand stretched forth to grasp; and oft
have I dreamt that stealing must be more blessed than taking."Wretched am I that my hand may never rest from giving: an envious fate
is mine that I see expectant eyes and nights made bright with longing."Oh, the wretchedness of all them that give! Oh, the clouds that cover
the face of my sun! That craving for desire! that burning hunger at the
end of the feast!"They take what I give them; but do I touch their soul? A gulf is there
'twixt giving and taking; and the smallest gulf is the last to be
bridged."An appetite is born from out my beauty: would that I might do harm to
them that I fill with light; would that I might rob them of the gifts I
have given:—thus do I thirst for wickedness."To withdraw my hand when their hand is ready stretched forth like the
waterfall that wavers, wavers even in its fall:—thus do I thirst for
wickedness."For such vengeance doth my fulness yearn: to such tricks doth my
loneliness give birth."My joy in giving died with the deed. By its very fulness did my virtue
grow weary of itself."He who giveth risketh to lose his shame; he that is ever distributing
groweth callous in hand and heart therefrom."Mine eyes no longer melt into tears at the sight of the suppliant's
shame; my hand hath become too hard to feel the quivering of laden
hands."Whither have ye fled, the tears of mine eyes and the bloom of my
heart? Oh, the solitude of all givers! Oh, the silence of all beacons!"Many are the suns that circle in barren space; to all that is dark do
they speak with their light—to me alone are they silent."Alas, this is the hatred of light for that which shineth: pitiless it
runneth its course."Unfair in its inmost heart to that which shineth; cold toward
suns,—thus doth every sun go its way."Like a tempest do the suns fly over their course: for such is their
way. Their own unswerving will do they follow: that is their coldness."Alas, it is ye alone, ye creatures of gloom, ye spirits of the night,
that take your warmth from that which shineth. Ye alone suck your milk
and comfort from the udders of light."Alas, about me there is ice, my hand burneth itself against ice!"Alas, within me is a thirst that thirsteth for your thirst!"It is night: woe is me, that I must needs be light! And thirst after
darkness! And loneliness!"It is night: now doth my longing burst forth like a spring,—for
speech do I long."It is night: now do all gushing springs raise their voices. And my
soul too is a gushing spring."It is night: now only do all lovers burst into song. And my soul too
is the song of a lover."8Such things have never been written, never been felt, never beensuffered:only a God, only Dionysus suffers in this way. The reply
to such a dithyramb on the sun's solitude in light would be Ariadne.
... Who knows, but I, who Ariadne is! To all such riddles no one
heretofore had ever found an answer; I doubt even whether any one had
ever seen a riddle here. One day Zarathustra severelydetermines his
life-task—and it is also mine. Let no one misunderstand its meaning.
It's a yea-saying to the point of justifying, to the point of redeeming
even all that is past."I walk among men as among fragments of the future: of that future
which I see."And all my creativeness and effort is but this, that I may be able to
think and recast all these fragments and riddles and dismal accidents
into one piece."And how could I bear to be a man, if man were not also a poet, a
riddle reader, and a redeemer of chance!"To redeem all the past, and to transform every 'it was' into 'thus
would I have it'—that alone would be my salvation!"In another passage he defines as strictly as possible what to him alone
"man" can be,—not a subject for love nor yet for pity—Zarathustra
became master even of his loathing of man: man is to him a thing
unshaped, raw material, an ugly stone that needs the sculptor's chisel."No longer to will, no longer to value, no longer to create! Oh, that
this great weariness may never be mine!"Even in the lust of knowledge, I feel only the joy of my will to beget
and to grow; and if there be innocence in my knowledge, it is because
my procreative will is in it."Away from God and gods did this will lure me: what would there be to
create if there were gods?"But to man doth it ever drive me anew, myburning, creative will.
Thus driveth it the hammer to the stone."Alas, ye men, within the stone there sleepeth an image for me, the
image of all my dreams! Alas, that it should have to sleep in the
hardest and ugliest stone!"Now rageth my hammer ruthlessly against its prison.From the stone
the fragments fly: what's that to me?"I will finish it: for a shadow came unto me—the stillest and lightest
thing on earth once came unto me!"The beauty of the Superman came unto me as a shadow. Alas, my
brethren! What are the—gods to me now?"Let me call attention to one last point of view. The line in italics is
my pretext for this remark. A Dionysian life-task needs the hardness of
the hammer, and one of its first essentials is without doubt thejoy
even of destruction.The command, "Harden yourselves!" and the deep
conviction thatall creators are hard,is the really distinctive sign
of a Dionysian nature.BEYOND GOOD AND EVIL:"THE PRELUDE TO A PHILOSOPHY OF THE FUTURE"1My work for the years that followed was prescribed as distinctly
as possible. Now that the yea-saying part of my life-task was
accomplished,there came the turn of the negative portion, both in
word and deed: the transvaluation of all values that had existed
hitherto, the great war,—the conjuring-up of the day when the fatal
outcome of the struggle would be decided. Meanwhile, I had slowly to
look about me for my peers, for those who,out of strength,would
proffer me a helping hand in my work of destruction. From that time
onward, all my writings are so much bait: maybe I understand as much
about fishing as most people? If nothing wascaught,it was not I who
was at faultThere were no fish to come and bite.2In all its essential points, this book (1886) is a criticism ofmodernity,embracing the modern sciences, arts, even politics,
together with certain indications as to a type which would be the
reverse of modern man, or as little like him as possible, a noble
and yea-saying type. In this last respect the book is aschool
for gentlemen—the termgentlemanbeing understood here in a
much more spiritual and radical sense than it has implied hitherto.
All those things of which the age is proud,—as, for instance,
far-famed "objectivity," "sympathy with all that suffers," "the
historical sense," with its subjection to foreign tastes, with its
lying-in-the-dust beforepetits faits,and the rage for science,—are
shown to be the contradiction of the type recommended, and are
regarded as almost ill-bred. If you remember that this book follows
uponZarathustra,you may possibly guess to what system of diet it
owes its life. The eye which,owing to tremendous constraint, has
become accustomed to see at a great distance,—Zarathustrais even
more far-sighted than the Tsar,—is here forced to focus sharply that
which is close at hand, the present time, the things that lie about
him. In all the aphorisms and more particularly in the form of this
book, the reader will find the samevoluntaryturning away from those
instincts which made aZarathustraa possible feat. Refinement in
form, in aspiration, and in the art of keeping silent, are its more or
less obvious qualities; psychology is handled with deliberate hardness
and cruelty,—the whole book does not contain one single good-natured
word.... All this sort of thing refreshes a man. Who can guess the kind
of recreation that is necessary after such an expenditure of goodness
as is to be found inZarathustra? From a theological standpoint—now
pay ye heed; for it is but on rare occasions that I speak as a
theologian—it was God Himself who, at the end of His great work,
coiled Himself up in the form of a serpent at the foot of the tree of
knowledge. It was thus that He recovered from being a God.... He had
made everything too beautiful.... The devil is simply God's moment of
idleness, on that seventh day."THE GENEALOGY OF MORALS: A POLEMIC"The three essays which constitute this genealogy are, as regards
expression, aspiration, and the artof the unexpected, perhaps the
most curious things that have ever been written. Dionysus, as you know,
is also the god of darkness. In each case the beginning is calculated
to mystify; it is cool, scientific, even ironical, intentionally
thrust to the fore, intentionally reticent. Gradually less calmness
prevails; here and there a flash of lightning defines the horizon;
exceedingly unpleasant truths break upon your ears from out remote
distances with a dull, rumbling sound,—until very soon a fierce tempo
is attained in which everything presses forward at a terrible degree
of tension. At the end, in each case, amid fearful thunderclaps, a new
truth shines out between thick clouds. The truth of the first essays
the psychology of Christianity: the birth of Christianity out of the
spirit of resentment, not, as is supposed, out of the "Spirit,"—in
all its essentials, a counter-movement, the great insurrection against
the dominion of noble values. The second essay contains the psychology
of conscience: this is not, as you may believe, "the voice of God in
man"; it is the instinct of cruelty, which turns inwards once it is
unable to discharge itself outwardly. Cruelty is here exposed, for the
first time, as one of the oldest and most indispensable elements in the
foundation of culture. The third essay replies to the question as to
the origin of the formidable power of the ascetic ideal, of the priest
ideal, despite the fact that this ideal is essentially detrimental,
that it is a will to nonentity and to decadence. Reply: it flourished
not because God was active behind the priests, as is generally
believed, but because it wasafaute de mieux—from the fact that
hitherto it has been the only ideal and has had no competitors. "For
man prefers to aspire to nonentity than not to aspire at all." But
above all, until the time ofZarathustrathere was no such thing
as a counter-ideal. You have understood my meaning. Three decisive
overtures on the part of a psychologist to aTransvaluation of all
Values.—This book contains the first psychology of the priest."THE TWILIGHT OF THE IDOLS:HOW TO PHILOSOPHISE WITH THE HAMMER"1This work—which covers scarcely one hundred and fifty pages, with its
cheerful and fateful tone, like a laughing demon, and the production
of which occupied so few days that I hesitate to give their number—is
altogether an exception among books: there is no work more rich in
substance, more independent, more upsetting—more wicked. If any one
should desire to obtain a rapid sketch of how everything, before my
time, was standing on its head, he should begin reading me in this
book. That which is called "Idols" on the title page is simply the
old truth that has been believed in hitherto. In plain English,The
Twilight of the Idolsmeans that the old truth is on its last legs.2There is no reality, no "ideality," which has not been touched in
this book (touched! what a cautious euphemism!). Not only the eternal
idols, but also the youngest—that is to say, the most senile: modern
ideas, for instance. A strong wind blows between the trees and in
all directions fall the fruit—the truths. There is the waste of an
all-too-rich autumn in this book: you trip over truths. You even crush
some to death, there are too many of them. Those things that you can
grasp, however, are quite unquestionable; they are irrevocable decrees.
I alone have the criterion of "truths" in my possession. I alonecandecide. It would seem as if a second consciousness had grown up in me,
as if the "life-will" in me had thrown a light upon the downward path
along which it has been running throughout the ages. Thedownward
path—hitherto this had been called the road to "Truth." All obscure
impulse—"darkness and dismay"—is at an end, the "good man" was
precisely he who was least aware of the proper way.[1]And, speaking
in all earnestness, no one before me knew the proper way, the way
upwards: only after my time could men once more find hope, life-tasks,
and roads mapped outthat lead to culture—I am the joyful harbinger
of this culture.... On this account alone I am also a fatality.3Immediately after the completion of the above-named work, and without
letting even one day go by, I tackled the formidable task of theTransvaluationwith a supreme feeling of pride which nothing could
equal; and, certain at each moment of my immortality, I cut sign after
sign upon tablets of brass with the sureness of Fate. The Preface
came into being on 3rd September 1888. When, after having written it
down, I went out into the open that morning, I was greeted by the most
beautiful day I had ever seen in the Upper Engadine—clear, glowing
with colour, and presenting all the contrasts and all the intermediary
gradations between ice and the south. I left Sils-Maria only on the
20th of September. I had been forced to delay my departure owing to
floods, and I was very soon, and for some days, the only visitor in
this wonderful spot, on which my gratitude bestows the gift of an
immortal name. After a journey that was full of incidents, and not
without danger to life,—as for instance at Como, which was flooded
when I reached it in the dead of night,—I got to Turin on the
afternoon of the 21 st. Turin is the only suitable place for me, and
it shall be my home henceforward. I took the same lodgings as I had
occupied in the spring, 6111 Via Carlo Alberto, opposite the mighty
Palazzo Carignano, in which Vittorio Emanuele was born; and I had a
view of the Piazza Carlo Alberto andabove it across to the hills.
Without hesitating, or allowing myself to be disturbed for a single
moment, I returned to my work, only the last quarter of which had still
to be written. On the 30th September, tremendous triumph; the seventh
day; the leisure of a god on the banks of the Po.[2]On the same day,
I wrote the Preface toThe Twilight of the Idols,the correction of
the proofs of which provided me with recreation during the month of
September. Never in my life have I experienced such an autumn; nor
had I ever imagined that such things were possible on earth—a Claude
Lorrain extended to infinity, each day equal to the last in its wild
perfection.[1]A witty reference to Goethe's well-known passage in the
Prologue toFaust:—"A good man, though in darkness and dismay,May still be conscious of the proper way."The words are spoken by the Lord.—TR.[2]There is a wonderful promenade along the banks of the Po,
for which Turin is famous, and of which Nietzsche was particularly
fond.—TR."THE CASE OF WAGNER: A MUSICIAN'S PROBLEM"1In order to do justice to this essay a man ought to suffer from the
fate of music as from an open wound.—From what do I suffer when I
suffer from the fate of music? From the fact that music has lost
its world-transfiguring, yea-saying character—that it is decadent
music and no longer the flute of Dionysus. Supposing, however, that
the fate of music be as dear to man as his own life, because joy and
suffering are alike bound up with it; then he will find this pamphlet
comparatively mild andfull of consideration. To be cheerful in
such circumstances, and laugh good-naturedly with others at one's
self,—ridendodicere severum[1]when theverum dicerewould
justify every sort of hardness,—is humanity itself. Who doubts that
I, old artillery-man that I am, would be able if I liked to point myheavyguns at Wagner?—Everything decisive in this question I kept
to myself—I have loved Wagner.—After all, an attack upon a more than
usually subtle "unknown person" whom another would not have divined
so easily, lies in the meaning and path of my life-task. Oh, I have
still quite a number of other "unknown persons" to unmask besides a
Cagliostro of Music! Above all, I have to direct an attack against
the German people, who, in matters of the spirit, grow every day
more indolent, poorer in instincts, and morehonestwho, with an
appetite for which they are to be envied, continue to diet themselves
on contradictions, and gulp down "Faith" in company with science,
Christian love together with anti-Semitism, and the will to power (to
the "Empire"), dished up with the gospel of the humble, without showing
the slightest signs of indigestion. Fancy this absence of party-feeling
in the presence of opposites! Fancy this gastric neutrality and
"disinterestedness"! Behold this sense of justice in the German palate,
which can grant equal rights to all,—which finds everything tasteful!
Without a shadow of a doubt the Germans are idealists. When I was last
in Germany, I found German taste striving to grantWagner and theTrumpeter of Sakkingen[2]equal rights; while I myself witnessed
the attempts of the people of Leipzig to do honour to one of the most
genuine and most German of musicians,—using German here in the old
sense of the word,—a man who was no mere German of the Empire, the
master Heinrich Schütz, by founding a Liszt Society, the object of
which was to cultivate and spread artful (listige[3]) Church music.
Without a shadow of doubt the Germans are idealists.2But here nothing shall stop me from being rude, and from telling the
Germans one or two unpleasant home truths: who else would do it if I
did not? I refer to their laxity in matters historical. Not only have
the Germans entirely lost thebreadth of visionwhich enables one
to grasp the course of culture and the values of culture; not only
are they one and all political (or Church) puppets; but they have
also actuallyput a ban uponthis very breadth of vision. A man
must first and foremost be "German," he must belong to "therace";
then only can he pass judgment upon all values and lack of values
in history—then only can he establish them.... To be German is in
itself an argument, "Germany, Germany above all,"[4]is a principle;
the Germansstand for the "moral order of the universe" in history;
compared with the Roman Empire, they are the up-holders of freedom;
compared with the eighteenth century, they are the restorers of
morality, of the "Categorical Imperative." There is such a thing as
the writing of history according to the lights of Imperial Germany;
there is, I fear, anti-Semitic history—there is also history written
with an eye to the Court, and Herr von Treitschke is not ashamed
of himself. Quite recently an idiotic opinionin historicis,an
observation of Vischer the Swabian æsthete, since happily deceased,
made the round of the German newspapers as a "truth" to which every
Germanmust assentThe observation was this: "The Renaissanceandthe Reformation only together constitute a whole—the æsthetic
rebirth, and the moral rebirth." When I listen to such things, I lose
all patience, and I feel inclined, I even feel it my duty, to tell the
Germans, for once in a way, all that they have on their conscience.Every great crime against culture for the last four centuries lies
on their conscience....And always for the same reason, always owing
to their bottomless cowardice in the face of reality, which is also
cowardice in the face of truth; always owing to the love of falsehood
which has become almost instinctive in them—in short, "idealism."
It was the Germans who caused Europe to lose the fruits, the whole
meaning of her last period of greatness—the period of the Renaissance.
At a moment when a higher order of values, values that were noble,
that said yea to life, and that guaranteed a future, had succeeded
in triumphing over the opposite values,the values of degeneration,
in the very seat of Christianity itself,—andeven in the hearts of
those sitting there,—Luther, that cursed monk, not only restored the
Church, but, what was a thousand times worse, restored Christianity,
and at a time too when it lay defeated. Christianity, theDenial of
the Will to Live,exalted to a religion! Luther was an impossible
monk who, thanks to his own "impossibility," attacked the Church,
and in so doing restored it! Catholics would be perfectly justified
in celebrating feasts in honour of Luther, and in producing festival
plays[5]in his honour. Luther and the "rebirth of morality"! May all
psychology go to the devil! Without a shadow of a doubt the Germans
are idealists. On two occasions when, at the cost of enormous courage
and self-control, an upright, unequivocal, and perfectly scientific
attitude of mind had been attained, the Germans were able to discover
back stairs leading down to the old "ideal" again, compromises between
truth and the "ideal," and, in short, formulæ for the right to reject
science and to perpetrate falsehoods. Leibniz and Kant—these two
great breaks upon the intellectual honesty of Europe! Finally, at a
moment when there appeared on the bridge that spanned two centuries
of decadence, a superior force of genius and will which was strong
enough to consolidate Europe and to convert it into a political and
economic unit, with the object of ruling the world, the Germans, with
their Wars of Independence, robbed Europeof the significance—the
marvellous significance, of Napoleon's life. And in so doing they laid
on their conscience everything that followed, everything that exists
to-day,—this sickliness and want of reason which is most opposed to
culture, and which is called Nationalism,—thisnévrose nationalefrom which Europe is suffering acutely; this eternal subdivision of
Europe into petty states, with politics on a municipal scale: they have
robbed Europe itself of its significance, of its reason,—and have
stuffed it into a cul-de-sac. Is there any one except me who knows the
way out of this cul-de-sac? Does anyone except me know of an aspiration
which would be great enough to bind the people of Europe once more
together?3And after all, why should I not express my suspicions? In my case,
too, the Germans will attempt to make a great fate give birth merely
to a mouse. Up to the present they have compromised themselves with
me; I doubt whether the future will improve them. Alas! how happy I
should be to prove a false prophet in this matter! My natural readers
and listeners are already Russians, Scandinavians, and Frenchmen—will
they always be the same? In the history of knowledge, Germans are
represented only by doubtful names, they have been able to produce only
"unconscious" swindlers (this word applies to Fichte, Schelling,
Schopenhauer, Hegel, and Schleiermacher, just as well as to Kant or
Leibniz; they were all mereSchleiermachers).[6]The Germans must
not have the honour of seeing the first upright intellect in their
history of intellects, that intellect in which truth ultimately got the
better of the fraud of four thousand years, reckoned as one with the
German intellect. "German intellect" is my foul air: I breathe with
difficulty in the neighbourhood of this psychological uncleanliness
that has now become instinctive—an uncleanliness which in every
word and expression betrays a German. They have never undergone a
seventeenth century of hard self-examination, as the French have,—a
La Rochefoucauld, a Descartes, are a thousand times more upright
than the very first among Germans,—the latter have not yet had any
psychologists. But psychology is almost the standard of measurement
for the cleanliness or uncleanliness of a race.... For if a man is
not even clean, how can he be deep? The Germans are like women, you
can scarcely ever I fathom their depths—they haven't any, and that's
the end of it. Thus they cannot even be called shallow. That which is
called "deep" in Germany, is precisely this instinctive uncleanliness
towards one's self, of which I have just spoken: people refuse to be
clear in regard to their own natures. Might I be allowed, perhaps, to
suggest the word "German" as an international epithet denoting this
psychological depravity?—At the moment of writing, for instance, the
German Emperor is declaring it to be his Christian duty to liberate
the slaves in Africa;among us Europeans, then, this would be called
simply "German." ... Have the Germans ever produced even a book that
had depth? They are lacking in the mere idea of what constitutes a
book. I have known scholars who thought that Kant was deep. At the
Court of Prussia I fear that Herr von Treitschke is regarded as deep.
And when I happen to praise Stendhal as a deep psychologist, I have
often been compelled, in the company of German University Professors,
to spell his name aloud.4And why should I not proceed to the end? I am fond of clearing the
air. It is even part of my ambition to be considered as essentially a
despiser of Germans. I expressed my suspicions of the German character
even at the age of six-and-twenty (seeThoughts out of Season,vol. ii. pp. 164, 165),—to my mind the Germans are impossible.
When I try to think of the kind of man who is opposed to me in all
my instincts, my mental image takes the form of a German. The first
thing I ask myself when I begin analysing a man, is, whether he has a
feeling for distance in him; whether he sees rank, gradation, and order
everywhere between man and man; whether he makes distinctions; for
this is what constitutes a gentleman. Otherwise he belongs hopelessly
to that open-hearted, open-minded—alas! and always very good-natured
species,la canaille! But the Germans arecanaille—alas! they are
so good-natured! A man lowers himself by frequenting the society of
Germans: the German places every one on an equal footing. With theexception of my intercourse with one or two artists, and above all
with Richard Wagner, I cannot say that I have spent one pleasant hour
with Germans. Suppose, for one moment, that the profoundest spirit
of all ages were to appear among Germans, then one of the saviours
of the Capitol would be sure to arise and declare that his own ugly
soul was just as great. I can no longer abide this race with which
a man is always in bad company, which; has no idea of nuances—woe
to me! I am a nuance—and which has notespritin its feet, and
cannot even walk withal! In short, the Germans have no feet at all,
they simply have legs. The Germans have not the faintest idea of how
vulgar they are—but this in itself is the acme of vulgarity,—they are
not even ashamed of being merely Germans. They will have their say in
everything, they regard themselves as fit to decide all questions; I
even fear that they have decided about me. My whole life is essentially
a proof of this remark. In vain have I sought among them for a sign of
tact and delicacy towards myself. Among Jews I did indeed find it, but
not among Germans. I am so constituted as to be gentle and kindly to
every one,—I have the right not to draw distinctions,—but this does
not prevent my eyes from being open. I except no one, and least of all
my friends,—I only trust that this has not prejudiced my reputation
for humanity among them? There are five or six things which I have
always made points of honour. Albeit, the truth remains that for many
years I have considered almost every letter that has reached me as a
piece of cynicism. There is more cynicism in an attitudeof goodwill
towards me than in any sort of hatred. I tell every friend to his face
that he has never thought it worth his while tostudyany one of my
writings: from the slightest hints I gather that they do not even know
what lies hidden in my books. And with regard even to myZarathustra,which of my friends would have seen more in it than a piece of
unwarrantable, though fortunately harmless, arrogance? Ten years have
elapsed, and no one has yet felt it a duty to his conscience to defend
my name against the absurd silence beneath which it has been entombed.
It was a foreigner, a Dane, who first showed sufficient keenness of
instinct and of courage to do this, and who protested indignantly
against my so-called friends. At what German University to-day would
such lectures on my philosophy be possible, as those which Dr. Brandes
delivered last spring in Copenhagen, thus proving once more his right
to the title psychologist? For my part, these things have never caused
me any pain; that which isnecessarydoes not offend me.Amor fatiis the core of my nature. This, however, does not alter the fact that
I love irony and even world-historic irony. And thus, about two years
before hurling the destructive thunderbolt of theTransvaluation,which will send the whole of civilisation into convulsions, I sent
myCase of Wagnerout into the world. The Germans were given the
chance of blundering and immortalising their stupidity once more on my
account, and they still have just enough time to do it in. And have
they fallen in with my plans? Admirably! my dear Germans. Allow me to
congratulate you.