[2]The lowest of the Hindu castes.14.We have unlearned something. We have become more modest in every way. We
no longer derive man from the “spirit,” from the “godhead”; we have
dropped him back among the beasts. We regard him as the strongest of the
beasts because he is the craftiest; one of the results thereof is his
intellectuality. On the other hand, we guard ourselves against a conceit
which would assert itself even here: that man is the great second
thought in the process of organic evolution. He is, in truth, anything
but the crown of creation: beside him stand many other animals, all at
similar stages of development.... And even when we say that we say a bit
too much, for man, relatively speaking, is the most botched of all the
animals and the sickliest, and he has wandered the most dangerously from
his instincts—though for all that, to be sure, he remains the mostinteresting!—As regards the lower animals, it was Descartes who first
had the really admirable daring to describe them asmachina; the whole
of our physiology is directed toward proving the truth of this doctrine.
Moreover, it is illogical to set man apart, as Descartes did: what we
know of man today is limited precisely by the extent to which we have
regarded him, too, as a machine. Formerly we accorded to man, as his
inheritance from some higher order of beings, what was called “free
will”; now we have taken even this will from him, for the term no longer
describes anything that we can understand. The old word“will” now
connotes only a sort of result, an individual reaction, that follows
inevitably upon a series of partly discordant and partly harmonious
stimuli—the will no longer “acts,” or “moves.”... Formerly it was
thought that man’s consciousness, his “spirit,” offered evidence of his
high origin, his divinity. That he might beperfected, he was advised,
tortoise-like, to draw his senses in, to have no traffic with earthly
things, to shuffle off his mortal coil—then only the important part of
him, the “pure spirit,” would remain. Here again we have thought out the
thing better: to us consciousness, or “the spirit,” appears as a symptom
of a relative imperfection of the organism, as an experiment, a groping,
a misunderstanding, as an affliction which uses up nervous force
unnecessarily—we deny that anything can be done perfectly so long as it
is done consciously. The “pure spirit” is a piece of pure stupidity:
take away the nervous system and the senses, the so-called “mortal
shell,” andthe rest is miscalculation—that is all!...15.Under Christianity neither morality nor religion has any point of
contact with actuality. It offers purely imaginarycauses(“God,”
“soul,” “ego,” “spirit,” “free will”—or even “unfree”), and purely
imaginaryeffects(“sin,” “salvation,” “grace,” “punishment,”
“forgiveness of sins”). Intercourse between imaginarybeings(“God,”
“spirits,” “souls”); an imaginarynatural history(anthropocentric; a
total denial of the concept of natural causes); an imaginarypsychology(misunderstandings of self, misinterpretations of agreeable
or disagreeable general feelings—for example, of the states of thenervus sympathicuswith the help of the sign-language of
religio-ethical balderdash—, “repentance,” “pangs of conscience,”
“temptation by the devil,” “the presence of God”); an imaginaryteleology(the “kingdom of God,” “the last judgment,” “eternal
life”).—This purelyfictitious world, greatly to its disadvantage, is
to be differentiated from the world of dreams; the latter at least
reflects reality, whereas the former falsifies it, cheapens it and
denies it. Once the concept of “nature” hadbeen opposed to the concept
of “God,” the word “natural” necessarily took on the meaning of
“abominable”—the whole of that fictitious world has its sources in
hatred of the natural (—the real!—), and is no more than evidence of a
profound uneasiness in the presence of reality....This explains
everything.Who alone has any reason for living his way out of reality?
The man who suffers under it. But to suffer from reality one must be abotchedreality.... The preponderance of pains over pleasures is the
cause of this fictitious morality and religion: but such a preponderance
also supplies the formula fordécadence....16.A criticism of theChristian concept of Godleads inevitably to the
same conclusion.—A nation that still believes in itself holds fast to
its own god. In him it does honour to the conditions which enable it to
survive, to its virtues—it projects its joy in itself, its feeling of
power, into a being to whom one may offer thanks. He who is rich will
give of his riches; a proud people need a god to whom they can makesacrifices.... Religion, within theselimits, is a form of gratitude.
A man is grateful for his own existence: to that end he needs a
god.—Such a god must be able to work both benefits and injuries; he
must be able to play either friend or foe—he is wondered at for the
good he does as well as for the evil he does. But the castration,
against all nature, of such a god, making him a god of goodness alone,
would be contrary to human inclination. Mankind has just as much need
for an evil god as for a good god; it doesn’t have to thank mere
tolerance and humanitarianism for its own existence.... What would be
the value of a god who knew nothing of anger, revenge, envy, scorn,
cunning, violence? who had perhaps never experienced the rapturousardeursof victory and of destruction? No one would understand such a
god: why should any one want him?—True enough, when a nation is on the
downward path, when it feels its belief in its own future, its hope of
freedom slipping from it, when it begins to see submission as a first
necessity and the virtues of submission as measures of
self-preservation, then itmustoverhaul its god. He then becomes a
hypocrite, timorous and demure; he counsels “peace ofsoul,”
hate-no-more, leniency, “love” of friend and foe. He moralizes
endlessly; he creeps into every private virtue; he becomes the god of
every man; he becomes a private citizen, a cosmopolitan.... Formerly he
represented a people, the strength of a people, everything aggressive
and thirsty for power in the soul of a people; now he is simplythe
good god.... The truth is that there is no other alternative for gods:eitherthey are the will to power—in which case they are national
gods—orincapacity for power—in which case they have to be good....17.Wherever the will to power begins to decline, in whatever form, there is
always an accompanying decline physiologically, adécadence. The
divinity of thisdécadence, shorn of its masculine virtues and
passions, is converted perforce into a god of the physiologically
degraded, of the weak. Of course, they do notcallthemselves the
weak; they call themselves “the good.”... No hint is needed to indicate
the moments in history at which the dualistic fiction of a good and an
evil god first becamepossible. The same instinct which prompts the
inferior to reduce their own god to “goodness-in-itself” also prompts
them to eliminate all good qualities from the god of their superiors;
they make revenge on their masters by making adevilof the latter’s
god.—Thegoodgod, and the devil like him—both are abortions ofdécadence.—How can we be so tolerant of the naïveté of Christian
theologians as to join in their doctrine that the evolution of the
concept of god from “the god of Israel,” the god of a people, to the
Christian god, the essence of all goodness, is to be described asprogress?—But even Renan does this. As if Renan had a right to be
naïve! The contrary actually stares one in the face. When everything
necessary toascendinglife; when all that is strong, courageous,
masterful and proud has been eliminated from the concept of a god; when
he has sunk step by step to the level of a staff for the weary, a
sheet-anchor for the drowning; when he becomes the poor man’s god, the
sinner’s god, the invalid’s godpar excellence, and the attribute of
“saviour” or “redeemer” remains as the one essential attribute of
divinity—justwhatis the significance of such a metamorphosis?
whatdoes such areductionof the godhead imply?—To be
sure, the “kingdom of God” has thus grown larger. Formerly he had only
his own people, his “chosen” people. But since then he has gone
wandering, like his people themselves, into foreign parts; he has given
up settling down quietly anywhere; finally he has come to feel at home
everywhere, and is the great cosmopolitan—until now he has the “great
majority” on his side, and half the earth. But this god of the “great
majority,” this democrat among gods, has not become a proud heathen god:
on the contrary, he remains a Jew, he remains a god in a corner, a god
of all the dark nooks and crevices, of all the noisesome quarters of the
world!... His earthly kingdom, now as always, is a kingdom of the
underworld, asouterrainkingdom, a ghetto kingdom.... And he himself
is so pale, so weak, sodécadent.... Even the palest of the pale are
able to master him—messieurs the metaphysicians, those albinos of the
intellect. They spun their webs around him for so long that finally he
was hypnotized, and began to spin himself, and became another
metaphysician. Thereafter he resumed once more his old business of
spinning the world out of his inmost beingsub specie Spinozae;
thereafter he became ever thinner and paler—became the “ideal,” became
“pure spirit,” became “the absolute,” became “the thing-in-itself.”...The collapse of a god: he became a “thing-in-itself.”18.The Christian concept of a god—the god as the patron of the sick, the
god as a spinner of cobwebs, the god as a spirit—is one of the most
corrupt concepts that has ever been set up in the world: it probably
touches low-water mark in the ebbing evolution of the god-type. God
degenerated into thecontradiction of life. Instead of being its
transfiguration and eternal Yea! In him war is declared on life, on
nature, on the will to live! God becomes the formula for every slander
upon the “here and now,” and for every lie about the “beyond”! In him
nothingness is deified, and the will to nothingness is made holy!...19.The fact that the strong races of northern Europe did not repudiate this
Christian god doeslittle credit to their gift for religion—and not
much more to their taste. They ought to have been able to make an end of
such a moribund and worn-out product of thedécadence. A curse lies
upon them because they were not equal to it; they made illness,
decrepitude and contradiction a part of their instincts—and since then
they have not managed tocreateany more gods. Two thousand years have
come and gone—and not a single new god! Instead, there still exists,
and as if by some intrinsic right,—as if he were theultimatumandmaximumof the power to create gods, of thecreator spiritusin
mankind—this pitiful god of Christian monotono-theism! This hybrid
image of decay, conjured up out of emptiness, contradiction and vain
imagining, in which all the instincts ofdécadence, all the cowardices
and wearinesses of the soul find their sanction!—20.In my condemnation of Christianity I surely hope I do no injustice to a
related religion with an even larger number of believers: I allude toBuddhism. Both are to be reckoned among the nihilistic religions—they
are bothdécadencereligions—but they are separated from each other
in a very remarkable way. For the fact that he is able tocomparethem
at all the critic of Christianity is indebted to the scholars of
India.—Buddhism is a hundred times as realistic as Christianity—it is
part of its living heritage that it is able to face problems objectively
and coolly; it is the product of long centuries ofphilosophicalspeculation. The concept, “god,” was already disposed
of before it appeared. Buddhism is the only genuinelypositivereligion to be encountered in history, and this applies even to its
epistemology (which is a strict phenomenalism). It does not speak of a
“struggle with sin,” but, yielding to reality, of the “struggle with
suffering.” Sharply differentiating itself from Christianity, it puts
the self-deception that lies in moral concepts behind it; it is, in my
phrase,beyondgood and evil.—The two physiological facts upon which
it grounds itself and upon which it bestows its chief attention are:
first, an excessive sensitiveness to sensation, which manifests itself
as a refined susceptibility to pain, andsecondly, an extraordinary
spirituality, a too protracted concern with concepts and logical
procedures, underthe influence of which the instinct of personality
has yielded to a notion of the “impersonal.” (—Both of these states
will be familiar to a few of my readers, the objectivists, by
experience, as they are to me). These physiological states produced adepression, and Buddha tried to combat it by hygienic measures.
Against it he prescribed a life in the open, a life of travel;
moderation in eating and a careful selection of foods; caution in the
use of intoxicants; the same caution in arousing any of the passions
that foster a bilious habit and heat the blood; finally, noworry,
either on one’s own account or on account of others. He encourages ideas
that make for either quiet contentment or good cheer—he finds means to
combat ideas of other sorts. He understands good, the state of goodness,
as something which promotes health.Prayeris not included, and
neither isasceticism. There is no categorical imperative nor any
disciplines, even within the walls of a monastery (—it is always
possible to leave—). These things would have been simply means of
increasing the excessive sensitiveness above mentioned. For the same
reason he does not advocate any conflict with unbelievers; his teachingis antagonistic to nothing so much as to revenge, aversion,ressentiment(—“enmity never brings an end to enmity”: the moving
refrain of all Buddhism....) And in all this he was right, for it is
precisely these passions which, in view of his main regiminal purpose,
areunhealthful. The mental fatigue that he observes, already plainly
displayed in too much “objectivity” (that is, in the individual’s loss
of interest in himself, in loss of balance and of “egoism”), he combats
by strong efforts to lead even the spiritual interests back to theego. In Buddha’s teaching egoism is a duty. The “one thing needful,”
the question “how can you be delivered from suffering,” regulates and
determines the whole spiritual diet. (—Perhaps one will here recall
that Athenian who also declared war upon pure “scientificality,” to wit,
Socrates, who also elevated egoism to the estate of a morality).21.The things necessary to Buddhism are a very mild climate, customs of
great gentleness and liberality, andnomilitarism; moreover, it must
get its start among the higher and better educated classes.
Cheerfulness, quiet and the absence of desire are the chief desiderata,
and they areattained. Buddhism is not a religion in which perfection
is merely an object of aspiration: perfection is actually normal.—Under Christianity the instincts of the subjugated and the oppressed
come to the fore: it is only those who are at the bottom who seek their
salvation in it. Here the prevailing pastime, the favourite remedy for
boredom is the discussion of sin, self-criticism, the inquisition of
conscience; here the emotion produced bypower(called “God”) is
pumped up (by prayer); here the highest good is regarded as
unattainable, as a gift, as “grace.” Here, too, open dealing is lacking;
concealment and the darkened room are Christian. Here body is despised
and hygiene is denounced as sensual; the church even ranges itself
against cleanliness (—the first Christian order after the banishment of
the Moors closed the public baths, of which there were 270 in Cordova
alone). Christian, too, is a certain cruelty toward one’s self and
toward others; hatred of unbelievers; the will to persecute. Sombre and
disquieting ideas are in the foreground; the most esteemed states ofmind, bearing the most respectable names, are epileptoid; the diet is so
regulated as to engender morbid symptoms and over-stimulate the nerves.
Christian, again, is all deadly enmity to the rulers of the earth, to
the “aristocratic”—along with a sort of secret rivalry with them (—one
resigns one’s “body” to them; one wantsonlyone’s “soul”...). And
Christian is all hatred of the intellect, of pride, of courage, of
freedom, of intellectuallibertinage; Christian is all hatred of the
senses, of joy in the senses, of joy in general....22.When Christianity departed from its native soil, that of the lowest
orders, theunderworldof the ancient world, and began seeking power
among barbarian peoples, it no longer had to deal withexhaustedmen,
but with men still inwardly savage and capable of self-torture—in
brief, strong men, but bungled men. Here, unlike in the case of the
Buddhists, the cause of discontent with self, suffering through self, isnotmerely a general sensitiveness and susceptibility to pain, but, on
the contrary, an inordinate thirst for inflicting pain on others, a
tendencyto obtain subjective satisfaction in hostile deeds and ideas.
Christianity had to embracebarbaricconcepts and valuations in order
to obtain mastery over barbarians: of such sort, for example, are the
sacrifices of the first-born, the drinking of blood as a sacrament, the
disdain of the intellect and of culture; torture in all its forms,
whether bodily or not; the whole pomp of the cult. Buddhism is a
religion for peoples in a further state of development, for races that
have become kind, gentle and over-spiritualized (—Europe is not yet
ripe for it—): it is a summons that takes them back to peace and
cheerfulness, to a careful rationing of the spirit, to a certain
hardening of the body. Christianity aims at masteringbeasts of prey;
its modus operandi is to make themill—to make feeble is the
Christian recipe for taming, for “civilizing.” Buddhism is a religion
for the closing, over-wearied stages of civilization. Christianity
appears before civilization has so much as begun—under certain
circumstances it lays the very foundations thereof.23.Buddhism, I repeat, is a hundred times more austere, more honest, more
objective. It no longer has tojustifyits pains, its susceptibility
to suffering, by interpreting these things in terms of sin—it simply
says, as it simply thinks, “I suffer.” To the barbarian, however,
suffering in itself is scarcely understandable: what he needs, first of
all, is an explanation as towhyhe suffers. (His mere instinct
prompts him to deny his suffering altogether, or to endure it in
silence.) Here the word “devil” was a blessing: man had to have an
omnipotent and terrible enemy—there was no need to be ashamed of
suffering at the hands of such an enemy.—At the bottom of Christianity there are several subtleties that belong
to the Orient. In the first place, it knows that it is of very little
consequence whether a thing be true or not, so long as it isbelievedto be true. Truth andfaith: here we have two wholly distinct worlds
of ideas, almost two diametricallyoppositeworlds—the road to the
one and the road to the other lie miles apart. To understand that fact
thoroughly—this is almost enough, in the Orient, tomakeonea sage.
The Brahmins knew it, Plato knew it, every student of the esoteric knows
it. When, for example, a man gets anypleasureout of the notion that
he has been saved from sin, it isnotnecessary for him to be actually
sinful, but merely tofeelsinful. But whenfaithis thus exalted
above everything else, it necessarily follows that reason, knowledge and
patient inquiry have to be discredited: the road to the truth becomes a
forbidden road.—Hope, in its stronger forms, is a great deal more
powerfulstimulansto life than any sort of realized joy can ever be.
Man must be sustained in suffering by a hope so high that no conflict
with actuality can dash it—so high, indeed, that no fulfilment cansatisfyit: a hope reaching out beyond this world. (Precisely because
of this power that hope has of making the suffering hold out, the Greeks
regarded it as the evil of evils, as the mostmalignof evils; it
remained behind at the source of all evil.)[3]—In order thatlovemay
be possible, God must become a person; in order that the lower instincts
may take a hand in the matter God must be young. To satisfy the ardor of
the woman a beautifulsaint must appear on the scene, and to satisfy
that of the men there must be a virgin. These things are necessary if
Christianity is to assume lordship over a soil on which some
aphrodisiacal or Adonis cult has already established a notion as to what
a cult ought to be. To insist uponchastitygreatly strengthens the
vehemence and subjectivity of the religious instinct—it makes the cult
warmer, more enthusiastic, more soulful.—Love is the state in which man
sees things most decidedly as they arenot. The force of illusion
reaches its highest here, and so does the capacity for sweetening, fortransfiguring. When a man is in love he endures more than at any other
time; he submits to anything. The problem was to devise a religion which
would allow one to love: by this means the worst that life has to offer
is overcome—it is scarcely even noticed.—So much for the three
Christian virtues: faith, hope and charity: I call them the three
Christianingenuities.—Buddhism is in too late a stage of
development, too full of positivism, to be shrewd in any such way.—[3]That is, in Pandora’s box.24.Here I barely touch upon the problem of theoriginof Christianity.
Thefirstthing necessary to its solution is this: that Christianity
is to be understood only by examining the soil from which it sprung—it
isnota reaction against Jewish instincts; it is their inevitable
product; it is simply one more step in the awe-inspiring logic of the
Jews. In the words of the Saviour, “salvation is of the Jews.”[4]—Thesecondthing to remember is this: that the psychological type of the
Galilean is still to be recognized, but it was only in its most
degenerate form (which is at once maimed and overladen with foreign
features) that it could serve in the manner in which it has been used:
as a type of theSaviourof mankind.—[4]John iv, 22.The Jews are the most remarkable people in the history of the world, for
when they were confronted with the question, to be or not to be, they
chose, with perfectly unearthly deliberation, to beat any price: this
price involved a radicalfalsificationof all nature, of all
naturalness, of all reality, of the whole inner world,as well as of
the outer. They put themselvesagainstall those conditions under
which, hitherto, a people had been able to live, or had even beenpermittedto live; out of themselves they evolved an idea which stood
in direct opposition tonaturalconditions—one by one they distorted
religion, civilization, morality, history and psychology until each
became acontradictionof itsnatural significance. We meet with the
same phenomenon later on, in an incalculably exaggerated form, but only
as a copy: the Christian church, put beside the “people of God,” shows a
complete lack of any claim to originality. Precisely for this reason the
Jews are the mostfatefulpeople in the history of the world: their
influence has so falsified the reasoning of mankind in this matter that
today the Christian can cherish anti-Semitism without realizing that it
is no more than thefinal consequence of Judaism.In my “Genealogy of Morals” I give the first psychological explanation
of the concepts underlying those two antithetical things, anoblemorality and aressentimentmorality, the second of which is a mere
product of the denial of the former. The Judaeo-Christian moralsystem
belongs to the second division, and in every detail. In order to be able
to say Nay to everything representing anascendingevolution of
life—that is, to well-being, to power, to beauty, to self-approval—the
instincts ofressentiment, here become downright genius, had to invent
anotherworld in which theacceptance of lifeappeared as the most
evil and abominable thing imaginable. Psychologically, the Jews are a
people gifted with the very strongest vitality, so much so that when
they found themselves facing impossible conditions of life they chose
voluntarily, and with a profound talent for self-preservation, the side
of all those instincts which make fordécadence—notas if mastered
by them, but as if detecting in them a power by which “the world” could
bedefied. The Jews are the very opposite ofdécadents: they have
simply been forced intoappearingin that guise, and with a degree of
skill approaching thenon plus ultraof histrionic genius they have
managed to put themselves at the head of alldécadentmovements (—for
example, the Christianity of Paul—), and so make of them something
stronger than any party frankly sayingYestolife. To the sort of
men who reach out for power under Judaism and Christianity,—that is to
say, to thepriestlyclass—décadenceis no more than a means to an
end. Men of this sort have a vital interest in making mankind sick, and
in confusing the values of “good” and “bad,” “true” and “false” in a
manner that is not only dangerous to life, but also slanders it.25.The history of Israel is invaluable as a typical history of an attempt
todenaturizeall natural values: I point to five facts which bear
this out. Originally, and above all in the time of the monarchy, Israel
maintained therightattitude of things, which is to say, the natural
attitude. Its Jahveh was an expression of its consciousness of power,
its joy in itself, its hopes for itself: to him the Jews looked for
victory and salvation and through him they expected nature to give them
whatever was necessary to their existence—above all, rain. Jahveh is
the god of Israel, andconsequentlythe god of justice: this is the
logic of every race that has power in its hands and a good conscience in
the use of it. In the religious ceremonial of theJews both aspects of
this self-approval stand revealed. The nation is grateful for the high
destiny that has enabled it to obtain dominion; it is grateful for the
benign procession of the seasons, and for the good fortune attending its
herds and its crops.—This view of things remained an ideal for a long
while, even after it had been robbed of validity by tragic blows:
anarchy within and the Assyrian without. But the people still retained,
as a projection of their highest yearnings, that vision of a king who
was at once a gallant warrior and an upright judge—a vision best
visualized in the typical prophet (i. e., critic and satirist of the
moment), Isaiah.—But every hope remained unfulfilled. The old god no
longercoulddo what he used to do. He ought to have been abandoned.
But what actually happened? Simply this: the conception of him waschanged—the conception of him wasdenaturized; this was the price
that had to be paid for keeping him.—Jahveh, the god of “justice”—he
is in accord with Israelno more, he no longer vizualizes the national
egoism; he is now a god only conditionally.... The public notion of this
god now becomes merely aweapon in the hands of clerical agitators, who
interpret all happiness as a reward and all unhappiness as a punishment
for obedience or disobedience to him, for “sin”: that most fraudulent of
all imaginable interpretations, whereby a “moral order of the world” is
set up, and the fundamental concepts, “cause” and “effect,” are stood on
their heads. Once natural causation has been swept out of the world by
doctrines of reward and punishment some sort ofun-natural causation
becomes necessary: and all other varieties of the denial of nature
follow it. A god whodemands—in place of a god who helps, who gives
counsel, who is at bottom merely a name for every happy inspiration of
courage and self-reliance....Moralityis no longer a reflection of
the conditions which make for the sound life and development of the
people; it is no longer the primary life-instinct; instead it has become
abstract and in opposition to life—a fundamental perversion of the
fancy, an “evil eye” on all things.Whatis Jewish,whatis
Christian morality? Chance robbed of its innocence; unhappiness polluted
with the idea of “sin”; well-being representedas a danger, as a
“temptation”; a physiological disorder produced by the canker worm of
conscience....26.The concept of god falsified; the concept of morality falsified;—but
even here Jewish priest-craft did not stop. The whole history of Israel
ceased to be of any value: out with it!—These priests accomplished that
miracle of falsification of which a great part of the Bible is the
documentary evidence; with a degree of contempt unparalleled, and in the
face of all tradition and all historical reality, they translated the
past of their people intoreligiousterms, which is to say, they
converted it into an idiotic mechanism of salvation, whereby all
offences against Jahveh were punished and all devotion to him was
rewarded. We would regard this act of historical falsification as
something far more shameful if familiarity with theecclesiasticalinterpretation of history for thousands of years had not blunted our
inclinations for uprightnessin historicis. And the philosophers
support the church: thelieabout a “moral order of the world” runs
through the whole of philosophy,even the newest. What is the meaning
of a “moral order of the world”? That there is a thing called the will
of God which, once and for all time, determines what man ought to do and
what he ought not to do; that the worth of a people, or of an individual
thereof, is to be measured by the extent to which they or he obey this
will of God; that the destinies of a people or of an individual arecontrolledby this will of God, which rewards or punishes according to
the degree of obedience manifested.—In place of all that pitiable lierealityhas this to say: thepriest, a parasitical variety of man
who can exist only at the cost of every sound view of life, takes the
name of God in vain: he calls that state of human society in which he
himself determines the value of all things “the kingdom of God”; he
calls the means whereby that state of affairs is attained “the will of
God”; with cold-blooded cynicism he estimates all peoples, all ages and
all individuals by the extent of their subservience or opposition to the
power of the priestly order. One observes him at work: under the hand of
the Jewish priesthood thegreatage of Israel became an age of
decline; the Exile, with its long series of misfortunes, wastransformed into apunishmentfor that great age—during which priests
had not yet come into existence. Out of the powerful andwholly freeheroes of Israel’s history they fashioned, according to their changing
needs, either wretched bigots and hypocrites or men entirely “godless.”
They reduced every great event to the idiotic formula: “obedientordisobedient to God.”—They went a step further: the “will of God” (in
other words some means necessary for preserving the power of the
priests) had to bedetermined—and to this end they had to have a
“revelation.” In plain English, a gigantic literary fraud had to be
perpetrated, and “holy scriptures” had to be concocted—and so, with the
utmost hierarchical pomp, and days of penance and much lamentation over
the long days of “sin” now ended, they were duly published. The “will of
God,” it appears, had long stood like a rock; the trouble was that
mankind had neglected the “holy scriptures”.... But the “will of God”
had already been revealed to Moses.... What happened? Simply this: the
priest had formulated, once and for all time and with the strictest
meticulousness, what tithes were to be paid to him, from the largest to
thesmallest (—not forgetting the most appetizing cuts of meat, for
the priest is a great consumer of beefsteaks); in brief, he let it be
known justwhat he wanted, what “the will of God” was.... From this
time forward things were so arranged that the priest becameindispensable everywhere; at all the great natural events of life, at
birth, at marriage, in sickness, at death, not to say at the
“sacrifice” (that is, at meal-times), the holy parasite put in his
appearance, and proceeded todenaturizeit—in his own phrase, to
“sanctify” it.... For this should be noted: that every natural habit,
every natural institution (the state, the administration of justice,
marriage, the care of the sick and of the poor), everything demanded by
the life-instinct, in short, everything that has any valuein itself,
is reduced to absolute worthlessness and even made thereverseof
valuable by the parasitism of priests (or, if you chose, by the “moral
order of the world”). The fact requires a sanction—a power togrant
valuesbecomes necessary, and the only way it can create such values is
by denying nature.... The priest depreciates and desecrates nature: it
is only at this price that he can exist at all.—Disobedience to God,
whichactually means to the priest, to “the law,” now gets the name of
“sin”; the means prescribed for “reconciliation with God” are, of
course, precisely the means which bring one most effectively under the
thumb of the priest; he alone can “save”.... Psychologically considered,
“sins” are indispensable to every society organized on an ecclesiastical
basis; they are the only reliable weapons of power; the priestlivesupon sins; it is necessary to him that there be “sinning”.... Prime
axiom: “God forgiveth him that repenteth”—in plain English,him that
submitteth to the priest.27.Christianity sprang from a soil so corrupt that on it everything
natural, every natural value, everyrealitywas opposed by the deepest
instincts of the ruling class—it grew up as a sort of war to the death
upon reality, and as such it has never been surpassed. The “holy
people,” who had adopted priestly values and priestly names for all
things, and who, with a terrible logical consistency, had rejected
everything of the earth as “unholy,” “worldly,” “sinful”—this people
put its instinct into a final formula that was logical to the point of
self-annihilation: asChristianityit actually denied even the last
form of reality, the “holy people,” the “chosen people,”Jewishreality itself. The phenomenon is of the first order of importance: the
small insurrectionary movement which took the name of Jesus of Nazareth
is simply the Jewish instinctredivivus—in other words, it is the
priestly instinct come to such a pass that it can no longer endure the
priest as a fact; it is the discovery of a state of existence even more
fantastic than any before it, of a vision of life even moreunrealthan that necessary to an ecclesiastical organization. Christianity
actuallydeniesthe church....I am unable to determine what was the target of the insurrection said to
have been led (whether rightly orwrongly) by Jesus, if it was not the
Jewish church—“church” being here used in exactly the same sense that
the word has today. It was an insurrection against the “good and just,”
against the “prophets of Israel,” against the whole hierarchy of
society—notagainst corruption, but against caste, privilege, order,
formalism. It wasunbeliefin “superior men,” a Nay flung at
everythingthat priests and theologians stood for. But the hierarchy
that was called into question, if only for an instant, by this movement
was the structure of piles which, above everything, was necessary to the
safety of the Jewish people in the midst of the “waters”—it represented
theirlastpossibility of survival; it was the finalresiduumof
their independent political existence; an attack upon it was an attack
upon the most profound national instinct, the most powerful national
will to live, that has ever appeared on earth. This saintly anarchist,
who aroused the people of the abyss, the outcasts and “sinners,” the
Chandala of Judaism, to rise in revolt against the established order of
things—and in language which, if the Gospels are to be credited, would
get him sent to Siberia today—this man was certainly a political
criminal, at least in so far as it was possible to be one in soabsurdly unpoliticala community. This is what brought him to the
cross: the proof thereof is to be found in the inscription that was put
upon the cross. He died for hisownsins—there is not the slightest
ground for believing, no matter how often it is asserted, that he died
for the sins of others.—28.As to whether he himself was conscious of this contradiction—whether,
in fact, this was the only contradiction he was cognizant of—that is
quite another question. Here, for the first time, I touch upon the
problem of thepsychology of the Saviour.—I confess, to begin with,
that there are very few books which offer me harder reading than the
Gospels. My difficulties are quite different from those which enabled
the learned curiosity of the German mind to achieve one of its most
unforgettable triumphs. It is a long while since I, like all other young
scholars, enjoyed with all the sapient laboriousness of a fastidious
philologist the work of the incomparable Strauss.[5]At that time I was
twenty years old: now I am too serious for that sort of thing. What do I
care for the contradictions of “tradition”? How can any one call pious
legends “traditions”? The histories of saints present the most dubious
variety of literature in existence; to examine them by the scientific
method,in the entire absence of corroborative documents, seems to me
to condemn the whole inquiry from the start—it is simply learned
idling....[5]David Friedrich Strauss (1808-74), author of “Das Leben
Jesu” (1835-6), a very famous work in its day. Nietzsche here refers to
it.29.What concernsmeis the psychological type of the Saviour. This type
might be depicted in the Gospels, in however mutilated a form and
however much overladen with extraneous characters—that is, inspiteof the Gospels; just as the figure of Francis of Assisi shows itself in
his legends in spite of his legends. It isnota question of mere
truthful evidence as to what he did, what he said and how he actually
died; the question is, whether his type is still conceivable, whether it
has been handed down to us.—All the attempts that I know of to read thehistoryof a “soul” in the Gospels seem to me to reveal only a
lamentable psychological levity. M. Renan, that mountebankin
psychologicus, has contributed the two mostunseemlynotions to this
business of explaining the type of Jesus: the notion of thegeniusand
that of thehero(“héros”). But if there is anything essentially
unevangelical, it is surely the concept of the hero. What the Gospels
make instinctiveis precisely the reverse of all heroic struggle, of
all taste for conflict: the very incapacity for resistance is here
converted into something moral: (“resist not evil!”—the most profound
sentence in the Gospels, perhaps the true key to them), to wit, the
blessedness of peace, of gentleness, theinabilityto be an enemy.
What is the meaning of “glad tidings”?—The true life, the life eternal
has been found—it is not merely promised, it is here, it is inyou;
it is the life that lies in love free from all retreats and exclusions,
from all keeping of distances. Every one is the child of God—Jesus
claims nothing for himself alone—as the child of God each man is the
equal of every other man.... Imagine making Jesus ahero!—And what a
tremendous misunderstanding appears in the word “genius”! Our whole
conception of the “spiritual,” the whole conception of our civilization,
could have had no meaning in the world that Jesus lived in. In the
strict sense of the physiologist, a quite different word ought to be
used here.... We all know that there is a morbid sensibility of the
tactile nerves which causes those suffering from it to recoil from every
touch, and from every effort to grasp asolid object. Brought to its
logical conclusion, such a physiologicalhabitusbecomes an
instinctive hatred of all reality, a flight into the “intangible,” into
the “incomprehensible”; a distaste for all formulae, for all conceptions
of time and space, for everything established—customs, institutions,
the church—; a feeling of being at home in a world in which no sort of
reality survives, a merely “inner” world, a “true” world, an “eternal”
world.... “The Kingdom of God is withinyou”....30.The instinctive hatred of reality: the consequence of an extreme
susceptibility to pain and irritation—so great that merely to be
“touched” becomes unendurable, for every sensation is too profound.The instinctive exclusion of all aversion, all hostility, all bounds
and distances in feeling: the consequence of an extreme susceptibility
to pain and irritation—so great that it senses all resistance, all
compulsion to resistance, as unbearableanguish(—that is to say, asharmful, asprohibitedby the instinct of self-preservation), and
regards blessedness (joy) as possibleonly when it is no longer
necessary to offer resistance to anybody or anything, however evil or
dangerous—love, as the only, as theultimatepossibility of life....These are the twophysiological realitiesupon and out of which the
doctrine of salvation has sprung. I call them a sublime
super-development of hedonism upon a thoroughly unsalubrious soil. What
stands most closely related to them, though with a large admixture of
Greek vitality and nerve-force, is epicureanism, the theory of salvation
of paganism. Epicurus was atypical décadent: I was the first to
recognize him.—The fear of pain, even of infinitely slight pain—the
end of thiscanbe nothing save areligion of love....31.I have already given my answer to the problem. The prerequisite to it is
the assumption that the type of the Saviour has reached us only in a
greatly distorted form. This distortion is very probable: there are many
reasons why a type of that sort should not be handed down in a pure
form, complete and free of additions. The milieu in which this strange
figure movedmust have left marks upon him, and more must have been
imprinted by the history, thedestiny, of the early Christian
communities; the latter indeed, must have embellished the type
retrospectively with characters which can be understood only as serving
the purposes of war and of propaganda. That strange and sickly world
into which the Gospels lead us—a world apparently out of a Russian
novel, in which the scum of society, nervous maladies and “childish”
idiocy keep a tryst—must, in any case, havecoarsenedthe type: the
first disciples, in particular, must have been forced to translate an
existence visible only in symbols and incomprehensibilities into their
own crudity, in order to understand it at all—in their sight the type
could take on reality only after it had been recast in a familiar
mould.... The prophet, the messiah, the future judge, the teacher of
morals, the worker of wonders, John the Baptist—all these merely
presented chances to misunderstand it.... Finally, let us not underrate
thepropriumof all great, and especially all sectarian veneration: it
tends to erase from the venerated objects all its original traits and
idiosyncrasies, often so painfully strange—it does not even seethem. It is greatly to be regretted that no Dostoyevsky lived in the
neighbourhood of this most interestingdécadent—I mean some one who
would have felt the poignant charm of such a compound of the sublime,
the morbid and the childish. In the last analysis, the type, as a type
of thedécadence, may actually have been peculiarly complex and
contradictory: such a possibility is not to be lost sight of.
Nevertheless, the probabilities seem to be against it, for in that case
tradition would have been particularly accurate and objective, whereas
we have reasons for assuming the contrary. Meanwhile, there is a
contradiction between the peaceful preacher of the mount, the sea-shore
and the fields, who appears like a new Buddha on a soil very unlike
India’s, and the aggressive fanatic, the mortal enemy of theologians and
ecclesiastics, who stands glorified by Renan’s malice as “le grand
maître en ironie.” I myself haven’t any doubt that the greater part of
this venom (and no less ofesprit) got itself into the concept of the
Master only as a result of the excited nature of Christian propaganda:
we all know the unscrupulousness of sectarians when they set out to turn
their leader into anapologiafor themselves. When the early
Christians had need of an adroit, contentious, pugnacious and
maliciously subtle theologian to tackle other theologians, theycreateda “god” that met that need, just as they put into his mouth
without hesitation certain ideas that were necessary to them but that
were utterly at odds with the Gospels—“the second coming,” “the last
judgment,” all sorts of expectations and promises, current at the
time.—32.I can only repeat that I set myself against all efforts to intrude the
fanatic into the figure of the Saviour: the very wordimpérieux, used
by Renan, is alone enough toannulthe type. What the “glad tidings”
tell us is simply that there are no more contradictions; the kingdom of
heaven belongs tochildren; the faith that is voiced here is no more
an embattled faith—it is at hand, it has been from the beginning, it is
a sort of recrudescent childishness of the spirit. The physiologists, at
all events, are familiar with such a delayed and incomplete puberty in
the living organism, the result of degeneration. A faith of this sort is
not furious, it does not denounce, it does not defend itself: it does
not come with “the sword”—it does not realize how it will one day set
man against man. It does not manifest itself either by miracles, or by
rewards and promises, or by “scriptures”: it is itself, first and last,
its own miracle, its own reward, its own promise, its own “kingdom of
God.” This faith does not formulate itself—it simplylives, and so
guards itself against formulae. To be sure, the accident of environment,
of educational background gives prominence to concepts of a certain
sort: in primitive Christianity one findsonlyconcepts of a
Judaeo-Semitic character (—that of eating and drinking at the last
supper belongs to this category—an idea which, like everything else
Jewish, has been badly mauled by the church). But let us be careful not
to see in all this anything more than symbolical language, semantics[6]an opportunity to speak in parables. It is only on the theory that no
work is to be taken literally that this anti-realist is able to speak at
all. Set down among Hindus he would have made use of the concepts of
Sankhya,[7]and among Chinesehe would have employed those of
Lao-tse[8]—and in neither case would it have made any difference to
him.—With a little freedom in the use of words, one might actually call
Jesus a “free spirit”[9]—he cares nothing for what is established: the
wordkilleth,[10]whatever is establishedkilleth. The idea of
“life” as anexperience, as he alone conceives it, stands opposed to
his mind to every sort of word, formula, law, belief and dogma. He
speaks only of inner things: “life” or “truth” or “light” is his word
for the innermost—in his sight everything else, the whole of reality,
all nature, even language, has significance only as sign, as
allegory.—Here it is of paramount importance to be led into no error by
the temptations lying in Christian, or ratherecclesiasticalprejudices: such a symbolismpar excellencestands outside all
religion, all notions of worship, all history, all natural science, all
worldly experience, all knowledge, all politics, all psychology, all
books, all art—his “wisdom” is precisely apureignorance[11]of all
such things. He has never heard ofculture; he doesn’t have to make
war on it—he doesn’t even deny it.... The same thing may be said of thestate, of the whole bourgeoise social order, of labour, of war—he has
no ground for denying “the world,” for he knows nothing of the
ecclesiastical concept of “the world”....Denialis precisely the
thing that is impossible to him.—In the same way he lacks argumentative
capacity, and has no belief that an article of faith, a “truth,” may be
established by proofs (—hisproofs are inner “lights,” subjective
sensations of happiness and self-approval, simple “proofs of power”—).
Such a doctrinecannotcontradict: it doesn’t know that other
doctrines exist, orcanexist, and is wholly incapable of imagining
anything opposed to it.... If anything of the sort is ever encountered,
it laments the “blindness” with sincere sympathy—for it alone has
“light”—but it does not offer objections....