NOTES ON “THUS SPAKE ZARATHUSTRA” BY ANTHONY M. LUDOVICI.I have had some opportunities of studying the conditions under which
      Nietzsche is read in Germany, France, and England, and I have found that,
      in each of these countries, students of his philosophy, as if actuated by
      precisely similar motives and desires, and misled by the same mistaken
      tactics on the part of most publishers, all proceed in the same
      happy-go-lucky style when “taking him up.” They have had it said to them
      that he wrote without any system, and they very naturally conclude that it
      does not matter in the least whether they begin with his first, third, or
      last book, provided they can obtain a few vague ideas as to what his
      leading and most sensational principles were.Now, it is clear that the book with the most mysterious, startling, or
      suggestive title, will always stand the best chance of being purchased by
      those who have no other criteria to guide them in their choice than the
      aspect of a title-page; and this explains why “Thus Spake Zarathustra” is
      almost always the first and often the only one of Nietzsche’s books that
      falls into the hands of the uninitiated.The title suggests all kinds of mysteries; a glance at the
      chapter-headings quickly confirms the suspicions already aroused, and the
      sub-title: “A Book for All and None”, generally succeeds in dissipating
      the last doubts the prospective purchaser may entertain concerning his
      fitness for the book or its fitness for him. And what happens?“Thus Spake Zarathustra” is taken home; the reader, who perchance may know
      no more concerning Nietzsche than a magazine article has told him, tries
      to read it and, understanding less than half he reads, probably never gets
      further than the second or third part,—and then only to feel
      convinced that Nietzsche himself was “rather hazy” as to what he was
      talking about. Such chapters as “The Child with the Mirror”, “In the Happy
      Isles”, “The Grave-Song,” “Immaculate Perception,” “The Stillest Hour”,
      “The Seven Seals”, and many others, are almost utterly devoid of meaning
      to all those who do not know something of Nietzsche’s life, his aims and
      his friendships.As a matter of fact, “Thus Spake Zarathustra”, though it is unquestionably
      Nietzsche’s opus magnum, is by no means the first of Nietzsche’s works
      that the beginner ought to undertake to read. The author himself refers to
      it as the deepest work ever offered to the German public, and elsewhere
      speaks of his other writings as being necessary for the understanding of
      it. But when it is remembered that in Zarathustra we not only have the
      history of his most intimate experiences, friendships, feuds,
      disappointments, triumphs and the like, but that the very form in which
      they are narrated is one which tends rather to obscure than to throw light
      upon them, the difficulties which meet the reader who starts quite
      unprepared will be seen to be really formidable.Zarathustra, then,—this shadowy, allegorical personality, speaking
      in allegories and parables, and at times not even refraining from relating
      his own dreams—is a figure we can understand but very imperfectly if
      we have no knowledge of his creator and counterpart, Friedrich Nietzsche;
      and it were therefore well, previous to our study of the more abstruse
      parts of this book, if we were to turn to some authoritative book on
      Nietzsche’s life and works and to read all that is there said on the
      subject. Those who can read German will find an excellent guide, in this
      respect, in Frau Foerster-Nietzsche’s exhaustive and highly interesting
      biography of her brother: “Das Leben Friedrich Nietzsche’s” (published by
      Naumann); while the works of Deussen, Raoul Richter, and Baroness Isabelle
      von Unger-Sternberg, will be found to throw useful and necessary light
      upon many questions which it would be difficult for a sister to touch
      upon.In regard to the actual philosophical views expounded in this work, there
      is an excellent way of clearing up any difficulties they may present, and
      that is by an appeal to Nietzsche’s other works. Again and again, of
      course, he will be found to express himself so clearly that all reference
      to his other writings may be dispensed with; but where this is not the
      case, the advice he himself gives is after all the best to be followed
      here, viz.:—to regard such works as: “Joyful Science”, “Beyond Good
      and Evil”, “The Genealogy of Morals”, “The Twilight of the Idols”, “The
      Antichrist”, “The Will to Power”, etc., etc., as the necessary preparation
      for “Thus Spake Zarathustra”.These directions, though they are by no means simple to carry out, seem at
      least to possess the quality of definiteness and straightforwardness.
      “Follow them and all will be clear,” I seem to imply. But I regret to say
      that this is not really the case. For my experience tells me that even
      after the above directions have been followed with the greatest possible
      zeal, the student will still halt in perplexity before certain passages in
      the book before us, and wonder what they mean. Now, it is with the view of
      giving a little additional help to all those who find themselves in this
      position that I proceed to put forth my own personal interpretation of the
      more abstruse passages in this work.In offering this little commentary to the Nietzsche student, I should like
      it to be understood that I make no claim as to its infallibility or
      indispensability. It represents but an attempt on my part—a very
      feeble one perhaps—to give the reader what little help I can in
      surmounting difficulties which a long study of Nietzsche’s life and works
      has enabled me, partially I hope, to overcome....Perhaps it would be as well to start out with a broad and rapid sketch of
      Nietzsche as a writer on Morals, Evolution, and Sociology, so that the
      reader may be prepared to pick out for himself, so to speak, all passages
      in this work bearing in any way upon Nietzsche’s views in those three
      important branches of knowledge.(A.) Nietzsche and Morality.In morality, Nietzsche starts out by adopting the position of the
      relativist. He says there are no absolute values “good” and “evil”; these
      are mere means adopted by all in order to acquire power to maintain their
      place in the world, or to become supreme. It is the lion’s good to devour
      an antelope. It is the dead-leaf butterfly’s good to tell a foe a
      falsehood. For when the dead-leaf butterfly is in danger, it clings to the
      side of a twig, and what it says to its foe is practically this: “I am not
      a butterfly, I am a dead leaf, and can be of no use to thee.” This is a
      lie which is good to the butterfly, for it preserves it. In nature every
      species of organic being instinctively adopts and practises those acts
      which most conduce to the prevalence or supremacy of its kind. Once the
      most favourable order of conduct is found, proved efficient and
      established, it becomes the ruling morality of the species that adopts it
      and bears them along to victory. All species must not and cannot value
      alike, for what is the lion’s good is the antelope’s evil and vice versa.Concepts of good and evil are therefore, in their origin, merely a means
      to an end, they are expedients for acquiring power.Applying this principle to mankind, Nietzsche attacked Christian moral
      values. He declared them to be, like all other morals, merely an expedient
      for protecting a certain type of man. In the case of Christianity this
      type was, according to Nietzsche, a low one.Conflicting moral codes have been no more than the conflicting weapons of
      different classes of men; for in mankind there is a continual war between
      the powerful, the noble, the strong, and the well-constituted on the one
      side, and the impotent, the mean, the weak, and the ill-constituted on the
      other. The war is a war of moral principles. The morality of the powerful
      class, Nietzsche calls NOBLE- or MASTER-MORALITY; that of the weak and
      subordinate class he calls SLAVE-MORALITY. In the first morality it is the
      eagle which, looking down upon a browsing lamb, contends that “eating lamb
      is good.” In the second, the slave-morality, it is the lamb which, looking
      up from the sward, bleats dissentingly: “Eating lamb is evil.”(B.) The Master- and Slave-Morality Compared.The first morality is active, creative, Dionysian. The second is passive,
      defensive,—to it belongs the “struggle for existence.”Where attempts have not been made to reconcile the two moralities, they
      may be described as follows:—All is GOOD in the noble morality which
      proceeds from strength, power, health, well-constitutedness, happiness,
      and awfulness; for, the motive force behind the people practising it is
      “the struggle for power.” The antithesis “good and bad” to this first
      class means the same as “noble” and “despicable.” “Bad” in the
      master-morality must be applied to the coward, to all acts that spring
      from weakness, to the man with “an eye to the main chance,” who would
      forsake everything in order to live.With the second, the slave-morality, the case is different. There,
      inasmuch as the community is an oppressed, suffering, unemancipated, and
      weary one, all THAT will be held to be good which alleviates the state of
      suffering. Pity, the obliging hand, the warm heart, patience, industry,
      and humility—these are unquestionably the qualities we shall here
      find flooded with the light of approval and admiration; because they are
      the most USEFUL qualities—; they make life endurable, they are of
      assistance in the “struggle for existence” which is the motive force
      behind the people practising this morality. To this class, all that is
      AWFUL is bad, in fact it is THE evil par excellence. Strength, health,
      superabundance of animal spirits and power, are regarded with hate,
      suspicion, and fear by the subordinate class.Now Nietzsche believed that the first or the noble-morality conduced to an
      ascent in the line of life; because it was creative and active. On the
      other hand, he believed that the second or slave-morality, where it became
      paramount, led to degeneration, because it was passive and defensive,
      wanting merely to keep those who practised it alive. Hence his earnest
      advocacy of noble-morality.(C.) Nietzsche and Evolution.Nietzsche as an evolutionist I shall have occasion to define and discuss
      in the course of these notes (see Notes on Chapter LVI., par.10, and on
      Chapter LVII.). For the present let it suffice for us to know that he
      accepted the “Development Hypothesis” as an explanation of the origin of
      species: but he did not halt where most naturalists have halted. He by no
      means regarded man as the highest possible being which evolution could
      arrive at; for though his physical development may have reached its limit,
      this is not the case with his mental or spiritual attributes. If the
      process be a fact; if things have BECOME what they are, then, he contends,
      we may describe no limit to man’s aspirations. If he struggled up from
      barbarism, and still more remotely from the lower Primates, his ideal
      should be to surpass man himself and reach Superman (see especially the
      Prologue).(D.) Nietzsche and Sociology.Nietzsche as a sociologist aims at an aristocratic arrangement of society.
      He would have us rear an ideal race. Honest and truthful in intellectual
      matters, he could not even think that men are equal. “With these preachers
      of equality will I not be mixed up and confounded. For thus speaketh
      justice unto ME: ‘Men are not equal.’” He sees precisely in this
      inequality a purpose to be served, a condition to be exploited. “Every
      elevation of the type ‘man,’” he writes in “Beyond Good and Evil”, “has
      hitherto been the work of an aristocratic society—and so will it
      always be—a society believing in a long scale of gradations of rank
      and differences of worth among human beings.”Those who are sufficiently interested to desire to read his own detailed
      account of the society he would fain establish, will find an excellent
      passage in Aphorism 57 of “The Antichrist”....