The Project Gutenberg eBook ofThe Will to Power: An Attempted Transvaluation of All Values. Book I and IIThis ebook is for the use of anyone anywhere in the United States and
most other parts of the world at no cost and with almost no restrictions
whatsoever. You may copy it, give it away or re-use it under the terms
of the Project Gutenberg License included with this ebook or online
atwww.gutenberg.org. If you are not located in the United States,
you will have to check the laws of the country where you are located
before using this eBook.Title: The Will to Power: An Attempted Transvaluation of All Values. Book I and IIAuthor: Friedrich Wilhelm NietzscheEditor: Oscar LevyTranslator: Anthony M. LudoviciRelease date: August 28, 2016 [eBook #52914]Most recently updated: October 23, 2024Language: EnglishCredits: Produced by Marc D'Hooghe at Free Literature (back onlinesoon in an extended version, alo linking to free sourcesfor education worldwide ... MOOC's, educationalmaterials,...) (Images generously made available by theInternet Archive.)*** START OF THE PROJECT GUTENBERG EBOOK THE WILL TO POWER: AN ATTEMPTED TRANSVALUATION OF ALL VALUES. BOOK I AND II ***THE WILL TO POWERAN ATTEMPTED TRANSVALUATION OF ALL VALUESBYFRIEDRICH NIETZSCHETRANSLATED BYANTHONY M. LUDOVICIVOL. IBOOKS I AND IIThe Complete Works of Friedrich NietzscheThe First Complete and Authorised English TranslationEdited by Dr Oscar LevyVolume FourteenT.N. FOULIS13 & 15 FREDERICK STREETEDINBURGH: AND LONDON1914CONTENTS OF VOL. I.PREFACE1FIRST BOOK. EUROPEAN NIHILISM.A Plan5I.Nihilism—1. Nihilism as an Outcome of the Valuations and Interpretationsof Existence which have prevailed hitherto82. Further Causes of Nihilism233. The Nihilistic Movement as an Expression of Decadence314. The Crisis: Nihilism and the Idea of Recurrence47II.Concerning the History of European Nihilism—(a)Modern Gloominess55(b)The Last Centuries73(c)Signs of Increasing Strength91SECOND BOOK. A CRITICISM OF THE HIGHEST VALUESTHAT HAVE PREVAILED HITHERTO.I.Criticism of Religion—1. Concerning the Origin of Religions1132. Concerning the History of Christianity1323. Christian Ideals179II.A Criticism of Morality—1. The Origin of Moral Valuations2102. The Herd2263. General Observations concerning Morality2374. How Virtue is made to Dominate2485. The Moral Ideal—A.A Criticism of Ideals264B.A Criticism of the "Good Man," of the Saint, etc.282C.Concerning the Slander of the so-called Evil Qualities291D.A Criticism of the Words: Improving, Perfecting, Elevating3126. Concluding Remarks concerning the Criticism of Morality320III.Criticism of Philosophy—1. General Remarks3272. A Criticism of Greek Philosophy3453. The Truths and Errors of Philosophers3694. Concluding Remarks in the Criticism of Philosophy378TRANSLATOR'S PREFACE.In the volume before us we have the first two books of what was to be
Nietzsche's greatest theoretical and philosophical prose work. The
reception given toThus Spake Zarathustrahad been so unsatisfactory,
and misunderstandings relative to its teaching had become so general,
that, within a year of the publication of the first part of that
famous philosophical poem, Nietzsche was already beginning to see
the necessity of bringing his doctrines before the public in a more
definite and unmistakable form. During the years that followed—that is
to say, between 1883 and 1886—this plan was matured, and although we
have no warrant, save his sister's own word and the internal evidence
at our disposal, for classingBeyond Good and Evil(published 1886)
among the contributions to Nietzsche's grand and final philosophical
scheme, "The Will to Power," it is now impossible to separate it
entirely from his chief work as we would naturally separateThe Birth
of Tragedy,theThoughts out of Season,the volumes entitledHuman,
all-too-Human, The Dawn of Day,andJoyful Wisdom.Beyond Good and Evil,then, together with its sequel,The Genealogy
of Morals,and the two little volumes,The Twilight of the Idolsand theAntichrist(published in 1889 and 1894 respectively), must
be regarded as forming part of the general plan of whichThe Will to
Powerwas to be theopus magnum.Unfortunately,The Will to Powerwas never completed by its author.
The text from which this translation was made is a posthumous
publication, and it suffers from all the disadvantages that a book
must suffer from which has been arranged and ordered by foster hands.
When those who were responsible for its publication undertook the task
of preparing it for the press, it was very little more than a vast
collection of notes and rough drafts, set down by Nietzsche from time
to time, as the material for his chief work; and, as any liberty taken
with the original manuscript, save that of putting it in order, would
probably have resulted in adding or excluding what the author would
on no account have added or excluded himself, it follows that in some
few cases the paragraphs are no more than hasty memoranda of passing
thoughts, which Nietzsche must have had the intention of elaborating
at some future time. In these cases the translation follows the German
as closely as possible, and the free use even of a conjunction has in
certain cases been avoided, for fear lest the meaning might be in the
slightest degree modified. It were well, therefore, if the reader could
bear these facts in mind whenever he is struck by a certain clumsiness,
either of expression or disposition, in the course of reading this
translation.It may be said that, from the day when Nietzsche first recognised the
necessity of making a more unequivocal appeal to his public than
theZarathustrahad been, that is to say, from the spring of 1883,
his work in respect ofThe Will to Powersuffered no interruption
whatsoever, and that it was his chief preoccupation from that period
until his breakdown in 1889.That this span of six years was none too long for the task he had
undertaken, will be gathered from the fact that, in the great work he
had planned, he actually set out to show that the life-principle, "Will
to Power," was the prime motor of all living organisms.To do this he appeals both to the animal world and to human society,
with its subdivisions, religion, art, morality, politics, etc. etc.,
and in each of these he seeks to demonstrate the activity of the
principle which he held to be the essential factor of all existence.Frau Foerster-Nietzsche tells us that the notion that "The Will to
Power" was the fundamental principle of all life, first occurred to her
brother in the year 1870, at the seat of war, while he was serving as
a volunteer in a German army ambulance. On one occasion, at the close
of a very heavy day with the wounded, he happened to enter a small
town which lay on one of the chief military roads. He was wandering
through it in a leisurely fashion when, suddenly, as he turned thecorner of a street that was protected on either side by lofty stone
walls, he heard a roaring noise, as of thunder, which seemed to come
from the immediate neighbourhood. He hurried forward a step or two, and
what should he see, but a magnificent cavalry regiment—gloriously
expressive of the courage and exuberant strength of a people—ride
past him like a luminous stormcloud. The thundering din waxed louder
and louder, and lo and behold! his own beloved regiment of field
artillery dashed forward at full speed, out of the mist of motes, and
sped westward amid an uproar of clattering chains and galloping steeds.
A minute or two elapsed, and then a column of infantry appeared,
advancing at the double—the men's eyes were aflame, their feet struck
the hard road like mighty hammer-strokes, and their accoutrements
glistened through the haze. While this procession passed before him,
on its way to war and perhaps to death,—so wonderful in its vital
strength and formidable courage, and so perfectly symbolic of a race
thatwillconquer and prevail, or perish in the attempt,—Nietzsche
was struck with the thought that the highest will to live could not
find its expression in a miserable "struggle for existence," but in
a will to war, a Will to Power, a will to overpower! This is said to
be the history of his first conception of that principle which is at
the root of all his philosophy, and twelve years later, inThus Spake
Zarathustra,we find him expounding it thus:—"Wherever I found a living thing, there found I Will to Power; and even
in the will of the servant found I the will to be master."Only where there is life, is there also will: not, however, Will to
Life, but—so teach I thee—Will to Power!"Much is reckoned higher than life itself by the living one; but out of
the very reckoning speaketh—the Will to Power!"And three years later still, inBeyond Good and Evil,we read the
following passage:—"Psychologists should bethink themselves before putting down the
instinct of self-preservation as the cardinal instinct of an organic
being. A living thing seeks above all todischargeits strength—life
itself isWill to Power; self-preservation is only one of the
indirect and most frequent results thereof."But in this volume, and the one that is to follow, we shall find
Nietzsche more mature, more sober, and perhaps more profound than
in the works above mentioned. All the loves and hates by which we
know him, we shall come across again in this work; but here he seems
to stand more above them than he had done heretofore; having onceenunciated his ideals vehemently and emphatically, he now discusses
them with a certain grim humour, with more thoroughness and detail, and
he gives even his enemies a quiet and respectful hearing. His tolerant
attitude to Christianity on pages 8-9, 107, 323, for instance, is
a case in point, and his definite description of what we are to
understand by his pity (p. 293) leaves us in no doubt as to the calm
determination of this work. Book One will not seem so well arranged
or so well worked out as Book Two; the former being more sketchy and
more speculative than the latter. Be this as it may, it contains deeply
interesting things, inasmuch as it attempts to trace the elements of
Nihilism—as the outcome of Christian values—in all the institutions
of the present day.In the Second Book Herbert Spencer comes in for a number of telling
blows, and not the least of these is to be found on page 237, where,
although his name is not mentioned, it is obviously implied. Here
Nietzsche definitely disclaims all ideas of an individualistic
morality, and carefully states thathisphilosophy aims ata new
order of rank.It will seem to some that morality is dealt with somewhat cavalierly
throughout the two books; but, in this respect, it should not be
forgotten that Nietzsche not only made a firm stand in favour of
exceptional men, but that he also believed that any morality is nothing
more than a mere system of valuations which are determined by the
conditions in which a given species lives. Hence his words on page 107:
"Beyond Good and Evil,—certainly; but we insist upon the unconditional
and strict preservation of herd-morality"; and on page 323: "Suppose
thestrongwere masters in all respects, even in valuing: let us try
and think what their attitude would be towards illness, suffering,
and sacrifice!Self-contempt on the part of the weakwould be the
result: they would do their utmost to disappear and to extirpate their
kind. And would this bedesirable?—should we really like a world
in which the subtlety, the consideration, the intellectuality, theplasticity—in fact, the whole influence of the weak—was lacking?"It is obvious from this passage that Nietzsche only objected to the
influence of herd-morality outside the herd—that is to say, among
exceptional and higher men who may be wrecked by it. Whereas most other
philosophers before him had been the "Altruist" of the lower strata of
humanity, Nietzsche may aptly be called the Altruist of the exceptions,
of the particular lucky cases among men. For such "varieties," he
thought, the morality of Christianity had done all it could do, and
though he in no way wished to underrate the value it had sometimes
been to them in the past, he saw that at present, in any case, it
might prove a great danger. With Goethe, therefore, he believed that
"Hypotheses are only the pieces of scaffolding which are erected round
a building during the course of its construction, and which are taken
away as soon as the edifice is completed. To the workman, they are
indispensable; but he must be careful not to confound the scaffolding
with the building."[1]It is deeply to be deplored that Nietzsche was never able to complete
his life-work. The fragments of it collected in volumes i. and ii. ofThe Will to Powerare sufficiently remarkable to convey some idea of
what the whole work would have been if only its author had been able to
arrange and complete it according to his original design.It is to be hoped that we are too sensible nowadays to allow our
sensibilities to be shocked by serious and well-meditated criticism,
even of the most cherished among our institutions, and an honest and
sincere reformer ought no longer to find us prejudiced—to the extent
of deafness—against him, more particularly when he comes forward with
a gospel—"The Will to Power"—which is, above all, a test of our power
to will.ANTHONY M. LUDOVICI.[1]Naturwissenschaft im Allgemeinen(Weimar Edition, i.
II, p. 132).PREFACE.1.Concerning great things one should either be silent or one should speak
loftily:—loftily—that is to say, cynically and innocently.2.What I am now going to relate is the history of the next two centuries.
I shall describe what will happen, what must necessarily happen:the triumph of Nihilism.This history can be written already; for
necessity itself is at work in bringing it about. This future is
already proclaimed by a hundred different omens; as a destiny it
announces its advent everywhere, for this music of to-morrow all ears
are already pricked. The whole of our culture in Europe has long
been writhing in an agony of suspense which increases from decade
to decade as if in expectation of a catastrophe: restless, violent,
helter-skelter, like a torrent that willreach its bourne,and
refuses to reflect—yea, that even dreads reflection.3.On the other hand, the present writer has done little else, hitherto,
thanreflect and meditate,likean instinctive philosopher and
anchorite, who found his advantage in isolation—in remaining outside,
in patience, procrastination, and lagging behind; like a weighing and
testing spirit who has already lost his way in every labyrinth of
the future; like a prophetic bird-spirit thatlooks backwardswhen
it would announce what is to come; like the first perfect European
Nihilist, who, however, has already outlived Nihilism in his own
soul—who has out-grown, overcome, and dismissed it.4.For the reader must not misunderstand the meaning of the title which
has been given to this Evangel of the Future. "The Will to Power:
An Attempted Transvaluation of all Values"—with this formula acounter-movementfinds expression, in regard to both a principle and
a mission; a movement which in some remote future will supersede this
perfect Nihilism; but which nevertheless regards it as anecessary
step,both logically and psychologically, towards its own advent,
and which positively cannot come, excepton top ofandout ofit.
For, why is the triumph of Nihilisminevitablenow? Because the
very values current amongst us to-day will arrive at their logical
conclusion in Nihilism,—because Nihilism is the only possible outcome
of our greatest values and ideals,—because we must first experience
Nihilism before we can realise what the actual worth of these "values"
was.... Sooner or later we shall be in need ofnew values.FIRST BOOK.EUROPEAN NIHILISM.I.A PLAN.1. Nihilism is at our door: whence comes this most gruesome of all
guests to us?—To begin with, it is a mistake to point to "social
evils," "physiological degeneration," or even to corruption as a cause
of Nihilism. This is the most straightforward and most sympathetic age
that ever was. Evil, whether spiritual, physical, or intellectual, is,
in itself, quite unable to introduce Nihilism,i.e.,the absolute
repudiation of worth, purpose, desirability. These evils allow of yet
other and quite different explanations. But there is onevery definite
explanationof the phenomena: Nihilism harbours in the heart of
Christian morals.2. The downfall of Christianity,—through its morality (which is
insuperable), which finally turns against the Christian God Himself
(the sense of truth, highly developed through Christianity, ultimately
revolts against the falsehood and fictitiousness of all Christian
interpretations of the world and its history. The recoil-stroke of
"Godis Truth" in the fanatical Belief, is: "All is false." Buddhism
ofaction....).3. Doubt in morality is the decisive factor. The downfall of themoralinterpretation of the universe, which loses itsraison
d'êtreonce it has tried to take flight to a Beyond, meets its
end in Nihilism. "Nothing has any purpose" (the inconsistency of
one explanation of the world, to which men have devoted untold
energy,—gives rise to the suspicion that all explanations may perhaps
be false). The Buddhistic feature: a yearning for nonentity (Indian
Buddhism has no fundamentally moral development at the back of it; that
is why Nihilism in its case means only morality not overcome; existence
is regarded as a punishment and conceived as an error; error is thus
held to be punishment—a moral valuation). Philosophical attempts to
overcome the "moral God" (Hegel,Pantheism). The vanquishing of
popular ideals: the wizard, the saint, the bard. Antagonism of "true"
and "beautiful" and "good."4. Against "purposelessness" on the one hand, against moral valuations
on the other: how far has all science and philosophy been cultivated
heretofore under the influence of moral judgments? And have we not got
the additional factor—the enmity of science, into the bargain? Or the
prejudice against science? Criticism of Spinoza. Christian valuations
everywhere present as remnants in socialistic and positivistic systems.A criticism of Christianmorality is altogether lacking.5. The Nihilistic consequences of present naturalscience (along
with its attempts to escape into a Beyond). Out of its practice there
finallyarisesa certain self-annihilation, an antagonistic attitude
towards itself—a sort of anti-scientificality. Since Copernicus man
has been rolling away from the centre towardsx.6. The Nihilistic consequences of the political and politico-economical
way of thinking, where all principles at length become tainted with the
atmosphere of the platform: the breath of mediocrity, insignificance,
dishonesty, etc. Nationalism. Anarchy, etc. Punishment. Everywhere
thedelivereris missing, either as a class or as a single man—the
justifier.7. Nihilistic consequences of history and of the "practical historian,"i.e.,the romanticist. The attitude of art is quite unoriginal in
modern life. Its gloominess. Goethe's so-called Olympian State.8. Art and the preparation of Nihilism. Romanticism (the conclusion of
Wagner'sRing of the Nibelung).I.NIHILISM.1. Nihilism As an Outcome of the Valuations and Interpretations of
Existence Which Have Prevailed Heretofore.2.What does Nihilism mean?—That the highest values are losing their
value.There is no bourne. There is no answer to the question: "to
what purpose?"3.Thorough Nihilism is the conviction that life is absurd, in the
light of the highest values already discovered; it also includes theviewthat we have not the smallest right to assume the existence of
transcendental objects or things in themselves, which would be either
divine or morality incarnate.This view is a result of fully developed "truthfulness": therefore a
consequence of the belief in morality.4.Whatadvantagesdid the Christian hypothesis of morality offer?(1) It bestowed an intrinsic value upon men, which contrasted with
their apparent insignificance and subordination to chance in the
eternal flux of becoming and perishing.(2) It served the purpose of God's advocates, inasmuch as it granted
the world a certainperfectiondespite its sorrow and evil—it also
granted the world that proverbial "freedom": evil seemed full ofmeaning.(3) It assumed that man could have aknowledgeof absolute values,
and thus granted himadequate perceptionfor the most important
things.(4) It prevented man from despising himself as man, from turning
against life, and from being driven to despair by knowledge: it was a
self-preservative measure.In short: Morality was the greatantidoteagainst practical and
theoretical Nihilism.5.But among the forces reared by morality, there wastruthfulness:
this in the end turns against morality, exposes theteleologyof the
latter, its interestedness, and now therecognitionof this lie so
long incorporated, from which we despaired of ever freeing ourselves,
acts just like a stimulus. We perceive certain needs in ourselves,
implanted during the long dynasty of the moral interpretation of life,
which now seem to us to be needs of untruth: on the other hand, those
very needs represent the highest values owing to which we are able to
endure life. We haveceasedfromattaching any worth to what we
know, and wedarenot attach any more worth to that with which we
would fain deceive ourselves—from this antagonism there results a
process of dissolution.6.This is theantinomy: In so far as we believe in morality, we condemn
existence.7.The highest values in the service of which man ought to live, more
particularly when they oppressed and constrained him most—thesesocial values, owing to their tone-strengtheningtendencies,
were built over men's heads as though they were the will of God or
"reality," or the actual world, or even a hope of a world to come.
Now that the lowly origin of these values has become known, the
whole universe seems to have been transvalued and to have lost its
significance—but this is only an intermediate stage.8.The consequence ofNihilism(disbelief in all values) as a result
of a moral valuation:—We have grown to dislike egotism(even
though we have realised the impossibility of altruism);—we have
grown to dislike what is most necessary(although we have recognised
the impossibility of aliberumarbitriumand of an "intelligible
freedom"[1]). We perceive that we do not reach the spheres in which we
have set our values—at the same time those other spheres in which we
live havenotthereby gainedone iotain value. On the contrary, we
aretired,because we have lost the main incentive to live. "All in
vain hitherto!"9."Pessimism as a preparatory state to Nihilism."10.A. Pessimism viewed as strength—in what respect?In the energy of
its logic, as anarchy, Nihilism, and analysis.B. Pessimism regarded as collapse—in what sense?In the sense of
its being a softening influence, a sort of cosmopolitan befingering, a
"tout comprendre," and historical spirit.Critical tension: extremes make their appearance and become dominant.11.The logic of Pessimism leads finally to Nihilism: what is the force at
work?—The notion thatthere are no values,andno purpose: the
recognition of the part that moral valuations have played in all other
lofty values.Result:moral valuations are condemnations, negations; morality is the
abdication of the will to live....[1]This is a Kantian term. Kant recognised two kinds of
Freedom—the practical and the transcendental kind. The first belongs
to the phenomenal, the second to the intelligible world.—TRANSLATOR'S NOTE.12.The Collapse of Cosmopolitan Values.A.Nihilism will have to manifest itself as apsychological condition,
firstwhen we have sought in all that has happened a purpose which
is not there: so that the seeker will ultimately lose courage.
Nihilism is therefore the coming into consciousness of the longwasteof strength, the pain of "futility," uncertainty, the lack
of an opportunity to recover in some way, or to attain to a state of
peace concerning anything—shame in one's own presence, as if one
hadcheatedoneself too long.... The purpose above-mentioned might
have been achieved: in the form of a "realisation" of a most high
canon of morality in all worldly phenomena, the moral order of the
universe; or in the form of the increase of love and harmony in the
traffic of humanity; or in the nearer approach to a general condition
of happiness; or even in the march towards general nonentity—any sort
of goal always constitutes a purpose. The common factor to all these
appearances is that something will beattained,through the process
itself: and now we perceive that Becoming has been aiming atnothing,and has achieved nothing. Hence the disillusionment in regard to a
so-calledpurpose in existence,as a cause of Nihilism; whether thisbe in respect of a very definite purpose, or generalised into the
recognition that all the hypotheses are false which have hitherto been
offered as to the object of life, and which relate to the whole of
"Evolution" (manno longeran assistant in, let alone the culmination
of, the evolutionary process).Nihilism will manifest itself as a psychological condition, in the
second place, when man has fixed a totality, a systematisation, even an
organisation in and behind all phenomena, so that the soul thirsting
for respect and admiration will wallow in the general idea of a highest
ruling and administrative power (if it be the soul of a logician,
the sequence of consequences and perfect reasoning will suffice to
conciliate everything). A kind of unity, some form of "monism":'
and as a result of this belief man becomes obsessed by a feeling of
profound relativity and dependence in the presence of an All which
is infinitely superior to him, a sort of divinity. "The general good
exacts the surrender of the individual ..." but lo, there is no such
general good! At bottom, man loses the belief in his own worth when no
infinitely precious entity manifests itself through him—that is to
say, he conceived such an All,in order to be able to believe in his
own worth.Nihilism, as a psychological condition, has yet a third and last form.
Admitting these twopoints of view: that no purpose can be assigned
to Becoming, and that no great entity rules behind all Becoming, in
which the individual may completely lose himself as in an element of
superior value; there still remains thesubterfugewhich would
consistin condemning this whole world of Becoming as an illusion,
and in discovering a world which would lie beyond it, and would be arealworld. The moment, however, that man perceives that this world
has been devised only for the purpose of meeting certain psychological
needs, and that he has no right whatsoever to it, the final form of
Nihilism comes into being, which comprisesa denial of a metaphysical
world,and which forbids itself all belief in arealworld. From
this standpoint, the reality of Becoming is the only reality that
is admitted: all bypaths to back-worlds and false godheads are
abandoned—butthis world is no longer endured, although no one wishes
to disown it.What has actually happened? The feeling of worthlessness was realised
when it was understood that neither the notion of "Purpose" nor
that of "Unity" nor that of "Truth" could be made to interpret
the general character of existence. Nothing is achieved or obtained
thereby; the unity which intervenes in the multiplicity of events is
entirely lacking: the character of existence is not "true," it isfalse; there is certainly no longer any reason to believe in arealworld. In short, the categories, "Purpose," "Unity," "Being," by means
of which we had lent some worth to life, we have once more divorced
from it—and the world now appearsworthlessto us....B.Admitting that we have recognised the impossibility ofinterpretingworld by means of thesethree categories, and that from this
standpoint the world begins to be worthless to us; we must ask
ourselves whence we derived our belief in these three categories.
Let us see if it is possible to refuse to believe in them. If we candeprive them of their value,the proof that they cannot be applied to
the world, is no longer a sufficient reason fordepriving that world
of its value.Result:The beliefin the categories of reason[2]is the cause
of Nihilism—we have measured the worth of the world according to
categorieswhich can only be applied to a purely fictitious world.Conclusion: All values with which we have tried, hitherto, to lend
the world some worth, from our point of view, and with which we have
thereforedeprived it of all worth(once these values have been
shown to be inapplicable)—all these values, are, psychologically,
the results of certain views of utility, established for the purpose
of maintaining and increasing the dominion of certain communities:
but falsely projected into the nature of things. It is always man'sexaggerated ingenuousnessto regard himself as the sense and measure
of all things.[2]This probably refers to Kant's celebrated table of
twelve categories. The four classes, quantity, quality, relation, and
modality, are each provided with three categories.—TRANSLATOR'S NOTE.13.Nihilism represents an intermediary pathological condition (the vast
generalisation, the conclusion that thereis no purposein anything,
is pathological):whether it be that the productive forces are not
yet strong enough—or thatdecadencestill hesitates and has not yet
discovered its expedients.The conditions of this hypothesis:—That there isno truth; that
there is no absolute state of affairs—no "thing-in-itself."This
alone is Nihilism, and of the most extreme kind.It finds that the
value of things consists precisely in the fact that these values arenotreal and never have been real, but that they are only a symptom
of strength on the part of thevaluer,a simplification serving thepurposes of existence.14.Values and their modificationare related to thegrowth of power of
the valuer.The measure ofdisbeliefand of the "freedom of spirit" which is
tolerated, viewed as anexpression of the growth of power."Nihilism" viewed as the ideal of thehighest spiritual power,of the
over-rich life, partly destructive, partly ironical.15.What isbelief? How is a belief born? All belief assumes thatsomething is true.The extremest form of Nihilism would mean thatallbelief—all
assumption of truth—is false: because no real world is at hand.
It were therefore: only anappearance seen in perspective,whose
origin must be found in us (seeing that we are constantly in need of a
narrower, a shortened, and simplified world).This should be realised, that the extent to which we can, in our heart
of hearts, acknowledge appearance, and the necessity of falsehood,
without going to rack and ruin, is themeasure of strength.In this respect, Nihilism, in that it is thenegationof a real world
and of Being, might bea divine view of the world.16.If we are disillusioned, we have not become so in regard to life,
but owing to the fact that our eyes have been opened to all kinds
of "desiderata." With mocking anger we survey that which is called
"Ideal": we despise ourselves only because we are unable at every
moment of our lives to quell that absurd emotion which is called
"Idealism." Thispamperingby means of ideals is stronger than the
anger of thedisillusioned one.17.To what extent does Schopenhauerian Nihilism continue to be the result
of the same ideal as that which gave rise to Christian Theism?The
amount of certainty concerning the most exalted desiderata, the highest
values and the greatest degree of perfection, was so great, that the
philosophers started out from it as if it had been ana prioriandabsolute fact: "God" at the head, as thegiven quantity—Truth. "To
become like God," "to be absorbed into the Divine Being"—these were
for centuries the most ingenuous and most convincing desiderata (but
that which convinces is not necessarily true on that account: it isnothing more nor less than convincing.An observation for donkeys).The granting of apersonal-realityto this accretion of ideals
has been unlearned: people have become atheistic. But has the ideal
actually been abandoned? The latest metaphysicians, as a matter of
fact, still seek their true "reality" in it—the "thing-in-itself"
beside which everything else is merely appearance. Their dogma is, that
because our world of appearance is so obviouslynotthe expression
of that ideal, it therefore cannot be "true"—and at bottom does not
even lead back to that metaphysical world as cause. The unconditioned,
in so far as it stands for that highest degree of perfection, cannot
possibly be the reason of all the conditioned. Schopenhauer, who
desired it otherwise, was obliged to imagine this metaphysical basis as
the antithesis to the ideal, as "an evil, blind will": thus it could
be "that which appears," that which manifests itself in the world of
appearance. But even so, he did not give up that ideal absolute—he
circumvented it....(Kant seems to have needed the hypothesis of "intelligible freedom,"[3]in order to relieve theens perfectumof the responsibility of having
contrived this world as it is, in short, in order to explain evil:
scandalous logic for a philosopher!).[3]See Note on p. 11.18.The most general sign of modern times: in his own estimation, man has
lost an infinite amount ofdignity.For a long time he was the centre
and tragic hero of life in general; then he endeavoured to demonstrate
at least his relationship to the most essential and in itself most
valuable side of life—as all metaphysicians do, who wish to hold fast
to thedignity of man,in their belief that moral values are cardinal
values. He who has let God go, clings all the more strongly to the
belief in morality.19.Every purelymoralvaluation (as, for instance, the Buddhistic)terminates in Nihilism: Europe must expect the same thing! It is
supposed that one can get along with a morality bereft of a religious
background; but in this direction the road to Nihilism is opened. There
is nothing in religion which compels us to regard ourselves as valuing
creatures.20.The question which Nihilism puts, namely, "to what purpose?" is the
outcome of a habit, hitherto, to regard the purpose as something fixed,
given and exactedfrom outside—that is to say, by some supernatural
authority. Once the belief in this has been unlearned, the force of an
old habit leads to the search afteranotherauthority, which wouldknow how to speak unconditionally,and couldpoint togoals and
missions. The authority of theconsciencenow takes the first place
(the moremoralityis emancipated from theology, the more imperative
does it become) as a compensation for thepersonal authority.Or
the authority ofreason.Or thegregarious instinct(the herd).
Or history with itsimmanentspirit, which has its goal in itself,
and to which one canabandon oneself.One would like toevadethewill,as also thewillingof a goal and the risk of setting oneself
a goal. One would like to get rid of the responsibility (Fatalismwould be accepted). Finally: Happiness and with a dash of humbug, thehappiness of the greatest number.It is said:—(1) A definite goal is quite unnecessary.(2) Such a goal cannot possibly be foreseen. Precisely now, whenwillin itsfullest strengthwerenecessary,it is in theweakestand mostpusillanimouscondition.Absolute mistrust concerning the
organising powerof the will.21.The perfect Nihilist.—The Nihilist's eyeidealises in an ugly
sense,and is inconstant to what it remembers: it allows its
recollections to go astray and to fade, it does not protect them from
that cadaverous coloration with which weakness dyes all that is distant
and past. And what it does not do for itself it fails to do for the
whole of mankind as well—that is to say, it allows it to drop.22.Nihilism. It may betwo things:—A. Nihilism as a sign ofenhanced spiritual strength: active Nihilism.B. Nihilism as a sign of thecollapseanddeclineof spiritualstrength: passive Nihilism.23.Nihilism, anormalcondition.It may be a sign ofstrength; spiritual vigour may have increased to
such an extent that thegoalstoward which man has marchedhitherto(the "convictions," articles of faith) are no longer suited to it
(for a faith generally expresses the exigencies of theconditions of
existence,a submission to the authority of an order of things whichconducesto theprosperity,thegrowthandpowerof a living
creature ...); on the other hand, a sign ofinsufficientstrength, to
fix a goal, a "wherefore," and a faith for itself.It reaches itsmaximumof relative strength, as a powerfuldestructiveforce, in the form ofactive Nihilism.Its opposite would bewearyNihilism, which no longer attacks: its
most renowned form being Buddhism: aspassiveNihilism, a sign of
weakness: spiritual strength may be fatigued,exhausted,so that the
goals and values which have prevailedhithertoare no longer suited
to it and are no longer believed in—so that the synthesis of values
and goals (upon which every strong culture stands)decomposes, and
the different values contend with one another:Disintegration,then
everything which is relieving, which heals, becalms, or stupefies,
steps into the foreground under the cover of variousdisguises,either religious, moral, political or æsthetic, etc.24.Nihilism is not only a meditating over the "in vain!"—not only the
belief that everything deserves to perish; but one actually puts
one's shoulder to the plough;one destroys.This, if you will, is
illogical; but the Nihilist does not believe in the necessity of being
logical.... It is the condition of strong minds and wills; and to these
it is impossible to be satisfied with the negation of judgment: thenegation by deedsproceeds from their nature. Annihilation by the
reasoning faculty seconds annihilation by the hand.25.Concerning the genesis of the Nihilist.The courage of all one reallyknowscomes but late in life. It is only quite recently that I have
acknowledged to myself that heretofore I have been a Nihilist from top
to toe. The energy and thoroughness with which I marched forward as a
Nihilist deceived me concerning this fundamental principle. When one is
progressing towards a goal it seems impossible that "aimlessnessper
se" should be one's fundamental article of faith.26.The Pessimism of strong natures.The "wherefore" after a terrible
struggle, even after victory. That something may exist which is a
hundred timesmore importantthan the question, whether we feel well
or unwell, is the fundamental instinct of all strong natures—and
consequently too, whether theothersfeel well or unwell. In short,
that we have a purpose, for which we would not even hesitate tosacrifice men,run all risks, and bend our backs to the worst:this
is the great passion.2. Further Causes of Nihilism.27.The causes of Nihilism: (1)The higher species is lacking, i.e.,the species whose inexhaustible fruitfulness and power would uphold our
belief in Man (think only of what is owed to Napoleon—almost all the
higher hopes of this century).(2)The inferior species("herd," "ass," "society") is forgetting
modesty, and inflates its needs intocosmicandmetaphysicalvalues. In this way all life isvulgarised: for inasmuch as themassof mankind rules, it tyrannises over theexceptions,so that
these lose their belief in themselves and becomeNihilists.All attempts toconceive of a new speciescome to nothing
("romanticism," the artist, the philosopher; against Carlyle's attempt
to lend them the highest moral values).The result is that higher types areresisted.The downfall and insecurity of all higher types.The struggle against
genius ("popular poetry," etc.). Sympathy with the lowly and the
suffering as astandardfor theelevation of the soul.Thephilosopher is lacking,the interpreter of deeds, and not alone
he who poetises them.28.ImperfectNihilism—its forms: we are now surrounded by them.All attempts made to escape Nihilism, which do not consist in
transvaluing the values that have prevailed hitherto, only make the
matter worse; they complicate the problem.29.The varieties of self-stupefaction.In one's heart of hearts, not to
know, whither? Emptiness. The attempt to rise superior to it all by
means of emotional intoxication: emotional intoxication in the form of
music, in the form of cruelty in the tragic joy over the ruin of the
noblest, and in the form of blind, gushing enthusiasm over individualmenor distinctperiods(in the form of hatred, etc.). The attempt
to work blindly, like a scientific instrument; to keep an eye on the
many small joys, like an investigator, for instance (modesty towards
oneself); the mysticism of the voluptuousjoyof eternal emptiness;art "for art's sake" ("le fait"), "immaculate investigation," in the
form of narcotics against the disgust of oneself; any kind of incessant
work,anykind of small foolish fanaticism; the medley of all
means, illness as the result of general profligacy (dissipation kills
pleasure).(1) As a result, feeble will-power.(2) Excessive pride and the humiliation of petty weakness felt as a
contrast.30.The time is coming when we shall have to pay for having beenChristiansfor two thousand years: we are losing the equilibrium
which enables us to live—for a long while we shall not know in what
direction we are travelling. We are hurling ourselves headlong into theoppositevaluations, with that degree of energy which could only have
been engendered in man by anovervaluationof himself.Now, everything is false from the root, words and nothing but words,
confused, feeble, or over-strained.(a)There is a seeking after a sort of earthly solution of the
problem of life, but in the same sense as that of thefinal triumphof truth, love, justice (socialism: "equality of persons").(b)There is also an attempt to hold fast to themoral ideal(with
altruism, self-sacrifice, and the denial of the will, in the front
rank).(c)There is even an attempt to hold fast to a "Beyond": were it
only as an antilogicalx; but it is forthwith interpreted in such a
way thata kind of metaphysical solace, after the old style, may be
derived from it.(d)There is an attempt to read the phenomena of life in such a
way as to arriveat the divine guidance of old,with its powers
of rewarding, punishing, educating, and of generally conducing to a
somethingbetterin the order of things.(e)People once more believe in good and evil; so that the victory of
the good and the annihilation of the evil is regarded as aduty(this
is English, and is typical of that blockhead, John Stuart Mill).(f) The contempt felt for "naturalness," for the desires and for the
ego: the attempt to regard even the highest intellectuality of art as a
result of an impersonal and disinterested attitude.(g) The Church is still allowed to meddle in all the essential
occurrences and incidents in the life of the individual, with a view to
consecrating it and giving it aloftiermeaning: we still have the
"Christian State" and the "Christian marriage."31.There have been more thoughtful and more destructively thoughtful[4]times than ours: times like those in which Buddha appeared, for
instance, in which the people themselves, after centuries of sectarian
quarrels, had sunk so deeply into the abyss of philosophical dogmas,
as, from time totime, European people have done in regard to the fine
points of religious dogma. "Literature" and the press would be the last
things to seduce one to any high opinion of the spirit of our times:
the millions of Spiritists, and a Christianity with gymnastic exercises
of that ghastly ugliness which is characteristic of all English
inventions, throw more light on the subject.EuropeanPessimismis still in its infancy—a fact which argues
against it: it has not yet attained to that prodigious and yearning
fixity of sight to which it attained in India once upon a time, and
in which nonentity is reflected; there is still too much of the
"ready-made," and not enough of the "evolved" in its constitution, too
much learned and poetic Pessimism; I mean that a good deal of it has
been discovered, invented, and "created," but not caused.