[4]zerdachtere.32.Criticism of the Pessimism which has prevailed hitherto. The want of
the eudæmonological standpoint, as a last abbreviation of the question:
what is thepurposeof it all? The reduction of gloom.OurPessimism: the world has not the value which we believed it to
have,—our faith itself has so increased our instinct for research that
we arecompelledto say this to-day. In the first place, it seems of
less value:at first it is feltto be of less value,—only in this
sense are we pessimists,—that is to say, with the will to acknowledge
thistransvaluation without reserve, and no longer, as heretofore, to
deceive ourselves and chant the old old story.It is precisely in this way that we find the pathos which urges us to
seek fornew values.In short: the world might have far more value
than we thought—we must get behind thenaïveté of our ideals,for
it is possible that, in our conscious effort to give it the highest
interpretation, we have not bestowed even a moderately just value upon
it.What has beendeified? The valuing instinct inside thecommunity(that which enabled it to survive).What has beencalumniated? That which has tended to separate higher
men from their inferiors, the instincts which cleave gulfs and build
barriers.33.Causes effecting therise of Pessimism:—(1) The most powerful instincts and those which promised most for the
future have hitherto beencalumniated,so that life has a curse upon
it.(2) The growing bravery and the more daring mistrust on the part of man
have led him to discover the fact thatthese instincts cannot be
cut adrift from life,and thus he turns to embrace life.(3) Only the mostmediocre,who are notconsciousof this conflict,
prosper; the higher species fail, and as an example of degeneration
tend to dispose all hearts against them—on the other hand, there is
some indignation caused bythe mediocre positing themselves as the end
and meaning of all things. No one can any longer reply to the question:
"Why?"(4) Belittlement, susceptibility to pain, unrest, haste, and confusion
are steadily increasing—the materialisation of all these tendencies,
which is called "civilisation," becomes every day more simple, with
the result that, in the face of the monstrous machine, the individualdespairsandsurrenders.34.Modern Pessimism is an expression of the uselessness only of themodernworld, not of the world and existence as such.35.The "preponderance ofpain over pleasure"or the reverse (Hedonism);
both of these doctrines are already signposts to Nihilism....For here, in both cases, no other final purpose is sought than the
phenomenon pleasure or pain.But only a man who no longer dares to posit a will, a purpose, and a
final goal can speak in this way—according to every healthy type of
man, the worth of life is certainly not measured by the standard of
these secondary things. And apreponderanceof pain would be possible
and,in spite of it,a mighty will, asaying of yeato life, and a
holding of this preponderance for necessary."Life is not worth living"; "Resignation"; "what is the good of
tears?"—this is a feeble andsentimental attitude of mind. "Un
monstre gai vaut mieux qu'un sentimental ennuyeux."36.The philosophie Nihilist is convinced that all phenomena are without
sense and are in vain, and that there ought to be no such thing as
Being without sense and in vain. But whence comes this "There ought
not to be?"—whence this "sense" andthis standard? At bottom the
Nihilist supposes that the sight of such a desolate, useless Being isunsatisfyingto the philosopher, and fills him with desolation and
despair. This aspect of the case is opposed to our subtle sensibilities
as a philosopher. It leads to the absurd conclusion that the character
of existencemust perforce afford pleasure to the philosopherif it
is to have any right to subsist.Now it is easy to understand that happiness and unhappiness, within
the phenomena of this world, can only serve the purpose ofmeans:
the question yet remaining to be answered is, whether itwill
ever be possiblefor us to perceive the "object" and "purpose" of
life—whether the problem of purposelessness or the reverse is not
quite beyond our ken.37.The development ofNihilism out of Pessimism.The denaturalisation
ofValues.Scholasticism of values. The values isolated, idealistic,
insteadof ruling and leading action, turnagainstit and condemn it.Opposites introduced in the place of natural gradations and ranks.
Hatred of the order of rank. Opposites are compatible with a plebeian
age, because they are more easy to grasp.Therejectedworld is opposed to an artificially constructed "true
and valuable" one. At last we discover out of what material the "true"
world was built; all that remains, now, is the rejected world, and to
the account of our reasons forrejecting it we place our greatest
disillusionment.At this pointNihilismis reached; the directing values have been
retained—nothing more!This gives rise tothe problem of strength and weakness:—(1) The weak fall to pieces upon it;(2) The strong destroy what does not fall to pieces of its own accord;(3) The strongest overcome the directing values.The whole condition of affairs produces the tragic age.3. The Nihilistic Movement As an Expression of Decadence.38.Just lately an accidental and in every way inappropriate term has been
very much misused: everywhere people are speaking of "Pessimism,"and there is a fight around the question (to which some replies must be
forthcoming): which is right—Pessimism or Optimism?People have not yet seen what is so terribly-obvious—namely, that
Pessimism is not a problem but asymptom,—that the term ought to be
replaced by "Nihilism,"—that the question, "to be or not to be," is
itself an illness, a sign of degeneracy, an idiosyncrasy.The Nihilistic movement is only an expression of physiological
decadence.39.To be understood:—That every kind of decline and tendency to
sickness has incessantly been at work in helping to create general
evaluations: that in those valuations which now dominate, decadence
has even begun to preponderate, that we have not only to combat the
conditions which present misery and degeneration have brought into
being; but that all decadence, previous to that of our own times, has
been transmitted and has therefore remained anactive forceamongst
us. A universal departure of this kind, on the part of man, from
his fundamental instincts, such universal decadence of the valuing
judgment, is the note of interrogationpar excellence,the real
riddle, which the animal "man" sets to all philosophers.40.The notion "decadence":—Decay, decline,andwaste,are,per se,in no way open to objection;they are the natural consequences of life
and vital growth. The phenomenon of decadence is just as necessary to
life as advance or progress is: we are not in a position which enables
us tosuppressit. On the contrary, reasonwould have it retain its
rights.It is disgraceful on the part of socialist-theorists to argue that
circumstances and social combinations could be devised which would put
an end to all vice, illness, crime, prostitution, and poverty.... But
that is tantamount to condemningLife... a society is not at liberty
to remain young. And even in its prime it must bring forth ordure and
decaying matter. The more energetically and daringly it advances, the
richer will it be in failures and in deformities, and the nearer it
will be to its fall. Age is not deferred by means of institutions. Nor
is illness. Nor is vice.41.Fundamental aspect of the nature of decadence:what has heretofore
been regarded as its causes are its effects.In this way, the whole perspectiveof the problems of moralityis
altered.All the struggle of morals against vice, luxury, crime, and even
against illness, seems anaïveté,a superfluous effort: there is no
such thing as "improvement" (a word againstrepentance).Decadence itself is not a thingthat can be withstood: it is
absolutely necessary and is proper to all ages and all peoples. That
which must bewithstood, and by all means in our power, is the
spreading of the contagion among the sound parts of the organism.Is that done? The veryreverseis done. It is precisely on this
account that one makes a stand on behalf ofhumanity.How do thehighest valuescreated hitherto stand in relation to this
fundamental question inbiology? Philosophy, religion, morality, art,
etc.(The remedy: militarism, for instance, from Napoleon onwards, who
regarded civilisation as his natural enemy.)42.All those things which heretofore have been regarded as thecauses of
degeneration,are really its effects.But those things also which have been regarded as theremediesof
degeneration are onlypalliativesof certain effects thereof: the
"cured" aretypes of the degenerate.The results of decadence: vice—viciousness; illness—sickliness;
crime—criminality; celibacy—sterility; hysteria—the weakness of the
will; alcoholism; pessimism, anarchy; debauchery (also of the spirit).
The calumniators, underminers, sceptics, and destroyers.43.Concerning the notion "decadence." (1) Scepticism is a result of
decadence: just as spiritual debauchery is.(2) Moral corruption is a result of decadence (the weakness of the will
and the need of strong stimulants).(3) Remedies, whether psychological or moral, do not alter the march
of decadence, they do not arrest anything; physiologically they do not
count.A peep into theenormous futilityof these pretentious "reactions";
they are forms of anæsthetising oneself against certain fatal
symptoms resulting from the prevailing condition of things; they do
not eradicate the morbid element; they are often heroic attempts to
cancel the decadent man, to allow only a minimum of hisdeleterious
influenceto survive.(4) Nihilism is not a cause, but only therationaleof decadence.(5) The "good" and the "bad" are no more than two types of decadence:
they come together in all its fundamental phenomena.(6) Thesocial problemis a result ofdecadence.(7) Illnesses, more particularly those attacking the nerves and the
head, are signs that thedefensivestrength of strong nature is
lacking; a proof of this is that irritability which causes pleasure and
pain to be regarded as problems of the first order.44.The most common types of decadence: (1) In the belief that they are
remedies, cures are chosen which only precipitate exhaustion;—this is
the case with Christianity (to point to themost egregious example of
mistaken instinct);—this is also the case with "progress."(2) Thepower of resistingstimuli is on the wane—chance rules
supreme: events are inflated and drawn out until they appear monstrous
... a suppression of the "personality," a disintegration of the
will; in this regard we may mention a whole class of morality, the
altruistic, that which is incessantly preaching pity, and whose most
essential feature is the weakness of the personality, so that itrings
in unison,and, like an over-sensitive string, does not cease from
vibrating ... extreme irritability....(3) Cause and effect are confounded: decadence is not understood as
physiological, and its results are taken to be the causes of the
general indisposition:—this applies to all religious morality.(4) A state of affairs is desired in which suffering shall cease;
life is actually considered the cause of all ills—unconsciousand
insensitive states (sleep and syncope) are held in incomparably higher
esteem than the conscious states; hence amethodof life.45.Concerning the hygiene of the "weak." All that is done in weakness ends
in failure. Moral: do nothing. The worst of it is, that precisely the
strength required in order to stop action, and to cease from reacting,
is most seriously diseased under the influence of weakness: that one
neverreacts more promptly or more blindly than when one should not
react at all.The strength of a character is shown by the ability to delay and
postpone reaction: a certain ἀδιαφορία is just as proper to it, as
involuntariness in recoiling, suddenness and lack of restraint in
"action," are proper to weakness. The will is weak: and the recipe
for preventing foolish acts would be: to have a strong will and to do
nothing—contradiction. A sort of self-destruction, the instinct of
self-preservation is compromised....The weak man injures himself....
That is the decadenttype.As a matter of fact, we meet with a vast amount of thought concerning
the means wherewithimpassibilitymay be induced. To this extent, the
instincts are on the right scent; for to do nothing is more useful than
to do something....All the practices of private orders, of solitary philosophers, and of
fakirs, are suggested by a correct consideration of the fact, that a
certain kind of man is mostuseful to himselfwhen he hinders his own
action as much as possible.Relieving measures: absolute obedience, mechanical activity, total
isolation from men and things that might exact immediate decisions and
actions.46.Weakness of Will: this is a fable that can lead astray. For there
is no will, consequently neither a strong nor a weak one. Themultiplicity and disintegration of the instincts, the want of system in
their relationship, constitute what is known as a "weak will"; their
co-ordination, under the government of one individual among them,
results in a "strong will"—in the first case vacillation and a lack
of equilibrium is noticeable: in the second, precision and definite
direction.47.That which is inherited is not illness, but apredisposition to
illness: a lack of the powers of resistance against injurious external
influences, etc. etc, broken powers of resistance; expressed morally:
resignation and humility in the presence of the enemy.I have often wondered whether it would not be possible to class all the
highest values of the philosophies, moralities, and religions which
have been devised hitherto, with the values of the feeble, theinsaneand theneurasthenicin a milder form, they present the same evils.The value of all morbid conditions consists in the fact that they
magnify certain normal phenomena which are difficult to discern in
normal conditions....Healthandillnessare not essentially different, as the ancient
doctors believed and as a few practitioners still believe to-day. They
cannot be imagined as two distinct principles or entities which fight
for the living organism and make it their battlefield. That is nonsense
and mere idle gossip, which no longer holds water. As a matter of
fact, there is only a difference ofdegree between these two living
conditions: exaggeration, want of proportion, want of harmony among the
normal phenomena, constitute the morbid state (Claude Bernard).Just as "evil" may be regarded as exaggeration, discord, and want of
proportion, so can "good" be regarded as a sort of protective diet
against the danger of exaggeration, discord, and want of proportion.Hereditary weaknessas adominantfeeling: the cause of the
prevailing values.N.B.—Weakness is in demand—why?... mostly because people cannot be
anything else than weak.Weakening considered a duty: The weakening of the desires, of the
feelings of pleasure and of pain, of the will to power, of the will
to pride, to property and to more property; weakening in the form of
humility; weakening in the form of a belief; weakening in the form
of repugnance and shame in the presence of all that is natural—in
the form of a denial of life, in the form of illness and chronic
feebleness; weakening in the form of a refusal to take revenge, to
offer resistance, to become an enemy, and to show anger.Blundersin the treatment: there is no attempt at combating weakness
by means of any fortifying system; but by a sort of justification
consisting of moralising;i.e.,by means ofinterpretation.Two totally different conditions areconfused: for instance, therepose of strength,which is essentially abstinence from reaction
(the prototype of the gods whom nothing moves), and thepeace of
exhaustion,rigidity to the point of anæsthesia. All these philosophic
and ascetic modes of procedure aspire to the second state, but actually
pretend to attain to the first ... for they ascribe to the condition
they have reached the attributes that would be in keeping only with a
divine state.48.The most dangerous misunderstanding.—There is one concept which
apparently allows of no confusion or ambiguity, and that is the conceptexhaustion.Exhaustion may be acquired or inherited—in any case it
alters the aspect andvalue of things.Unlike him who involuntarilygivesof the superabundance which he
both feels and represents, to the things about him, and who sees them
fuller, mightier, and more pregnant with promises,—who, in fact,canbestow,—the exhausted one belittles and disfigures everything he
sees—he impoverishes its worth: he is detrimental....No mistake seems possible in this matter: and yet history discloses the
terrible fact, that the exhausted have always beenconfoundedwith
those with the most abundant resources, and the latter with the most
detrimental.The pauper in vitality, the feeble one, impoverishes even life: the
wealthy man, in vital powers, enriches it. The first is the parasite of
the second: the second is a bestower of his abundance. How is confusion
possible?When he who was exhausted came forth withthe bearing of a very
active and energetic man (when degeneration implied a certain excess
of spiritual and nervous discharge), he wasmistakenfor the wealthy
man. He inspired terror. The cult of the madman is also always the cult
of him who is rich in vitality, and who is a powerful man. The fanatic,
the one possessed, the religious epileptic, all eccentric creatures
have been regarded as the highest types of power: as divine.This kind of strength which inspires terror seemed to be, above all,
divine: this was the starting-point of authority; herewisdomwas interpreted, hearkened to, and sought. Out of this there was
developed, everywhere almost, awillto "deify,"i.e.,to a typical
degeneration of spirit, body, and nerves: an attempt to discover the
road to this higher form of being. To make oneself ill or mad, to
provoke the symptoms of serious disorder—was called getting stronger,
becoming more superhuman, more terrible and more wise. People thought
they would thus attain to such wealth of power, that they would be able
todispenseit. Wheresoever there have been prayers, some one has
been sought who had something to give away.What led astray, here, was the experience of intoxication. This
increases the feeling of power to the highest degree, therefore, to the
mind of the ingenuous, it ispower.On the highest altar of powerthe most intoxicated manmust stand, the ecstatic. (There are two
causes ofintoxication: superabundant life, and a condition of morbid
nutrition of the brain.)49.Acquired,not inherited exhaustion: (1) inadequatenourishment,often the result of ignorance concerning diet, as, for instance, in the
case of scholars; (2) erotic precocity: the damnation more especially
of the youth of France—Parisian youths, above all, who are already
dirtied and ruined when they step out of theirlycéesinto the world,
and who cannot break the chains of despicable tendencies; ironical and
scornful towards themselves—galley-slaves despite all their refinement
(moreover, in the majority of cases, already a symptom of racial and
family decadence, as all hypersensitiveness is; and examples of the
infection of environment: to be influenced by one's environment is
also a sign of decadence); (3) alcoholism, not the instinct but the
habit, foolish imitation, the cowardly or vain adaptation to a ruling
fashion. What a blessing a Jew is among Germans! See the obtuseness,
the flaxen head, the blue eye, and the lack of intellect in the face,
the language, and the bearing; the lazy habit of stretching the limbs,
and the need of repose among Germans—a need which is not the result of
overwork, but of the disgusting excitation and over-excitation caused
by alcohol.50.A theory of exhaustion.—Vice, the insane (also artists), the
criminals, the anarchists—these arenot theoppressedclasses, butthe outcastsof the community of all classes hitherto.Seeing that all our classes are permeated by these elements, we have
grasped the fact thatmodern societyis not a "society" or a "body,"
but a diseased agglomeration of Chandala,—a society which no longer
has the strength even toexcrete.To what extent living together for centuries has very much deepenedsickliness:modern virtuee   }modern intellect } as forms of disease.modern science  }51.The state of corruption.—The interrelation of all forms of
corruption should be understood, and the Christian form (Pascal as
the type), as also the socialistic and communistic (a result of the
Christian), should not be overlooked (from the standpoint of natural
science, thehighestconception of society according to socialists,
is the lowest in the order of rank among societies); the "Beyond"
—corruption: as though outside the real world of Becoming there were a
world of Being.Here there must be no compromise, but selection, annihilation, and
war—the Christian Nihilistic standard of value must be withdrawn from
all things and attacked beneath every disguise ... for instance, from
modernsociology, music,andPessimism(all forms of the Christian
ideal of values).Either one thingorthe other is true—that is to say, tending to
elevate the type man....The priest, the shepherd of souls, should be looked upon as a form
of life which must be suppressed. All education, hitherto, has been
helpless, adrift, without ballast, and afflicted with the contradiction
of values.Either one thingorthe other is true—that is to say, tending to
elevate the type man....The priest, the shepherd of souls, should be looked upon as a form
of life which must be suppressed. All education, hitherto, has been
helpless, adrift, without ballast, and afflicted with the contradiction
of values.52.If Nature have no pity on the degenerate, it is not therefore
immoral: the growth of physiological and moral evils in the human
race, is rather theresultofmorbid and unnatural morality.The
sensitiveness of the majority of men is both morbid and unnatural.Why is it that mankind is corrupt in a moral and physiological respect?
The body degenerates if one organ isunsound.Theright of altruismcannot be traced to physiology, neither can the right to help and
to the equality of fate: these are all premiums for degenerates and
failures.There can be nosolidarityin a society containing unfruitful,
unproductive, and destructive members, who, by the bye, are bound to
have offspring even more degenerate than they are themselves.53.Decadence exercises a profound and perfectly unconscious influence,
even over the ideals of science: all our sociology is a proof of this
proposition, and it has yet to be reproached with thefact that
it has only the experience ofsociety in the process of decay,and inevitably takes its own decaying instincts as the basis of
sociological judgment.Thedecliningvitality of modern Europe formulates its social ideals
in its decaying instincts: and these ideals are all so like those ofold and effeteraces, that they might be mistaken for one another.Thegregarious instinct,then,—now a sovereign power,—is something
totally different from the instinct of anaristocratic society: and
the value of the sum depends upon the value of the units constituting
it.... The whole of our sociology knows no other instinct than that
of the herd,i.e.,of amultitude of mere ciphers—of which every
cipher has "equal rights," and where it is a virtue to be——naught....The valuation with which the various forms of society are judged to-day
is absolutely the same with that which assigns a higher place to peace
than to war: but this principle is contrary to the teaching of biology,
and is itself a mere outcome of decadent life. Life is a result of war,
society is a means to war.... Mr. Herbert Spencer was a decadent in
biology, as also in morality (he regarded the triumph of altruism as a
desideratum!!!).54.After thousands of years of error and confusion, it is my good fortune
to have rediscovered the road which leads to a Yea and to a Nay.I teach people to say Nay in the face of all that makes for weakness
and exhaustion.I teach people to say Yea in the face of all that makes for strength,
that preserves strength, and justifies the feeling of strength.Up to the present, neither the one nor the other has been taught; but
rather virtue, disinterestedness, pity, and even the negation of life.
All these are values proceeding from exhausted people.After having pondered over the physiology of exhaustion for some time,
I was led to the question: to what extent the judgments of exhausted
people had percolated into the world of values.The result at which I arrived was as startling as it could possibly
be—even for one like myself who was already at home in many a strange
world: I found that all prevailing values—that is to say, all those
which had gained ascendancy over humanity, or at least over its tamer
portions, could be traced back to the judgment of exhausted people.Under the cover of the holiest names, I found the most destructive
tendencies; people had actually given the name "God" to all that
renders weak, teaches weakness, and infects with weakness.... I found
that the "good man" was a form of self-affirmation on the part of
decadence.That virtue which Schopenhauer still proclaimed as superior to all,
and as the most fundamental of all virtues; even that same pity I
recognised as more dangerous than any vice.Deliberately to thwart
the law of selection among species, and their natural means of purging
their stock of degenerate members—this, up to my time, had been the
greatest of all virtues....One should do honour to thefatalitywhich says to the feeble:
"perish!"The opposing of this fatality, the botching of mankind and the allowing
of it to putrefy, was given the name "God" One shall not take the name
of the Lord one's God in vain....The race is corrupted—not by its vices, but by its ignorance: it is
corrupted because it has not recognised exhaustion as exhaustion:
physiological misunderstandings are the cause of all evil.Virtue is our greatest misunderstanding.Problem: how were the exhausted able to make the laws of values? In
other words, how did they who are the last, come to power?... How did
the instincts of the animal man ever get to stand on their heads?...4. The Crisis: Nihilism and the Idea of Recurrence.55.Extreme positions are not relieved by more moderate ones, but by
extremeoppositepositions. And thus the belief in the utter
immorality of nature, and in the absence of all purpose and sense, are
psychologically necessary attitudes when thebelief in God and in an
essentially moral order of things is no longer tenable.Nihilism now appears,notbecause the sorrows of existence are
greater than they were formerly, but because, in a general way, people
have grown suspicious of the "meaning" which might be given to evil and
even to existence. One interpretation has been overthrown: but since it
was held to betheinterpretation, it seems as though there were no
meaning in existence at all, as though everything were in vain.***It yet remains to be shown that this "in vain!" is the character
of present Nihilism. The mistrust of our former valuations has
increased to such an extent that it has led to the question: "are
not all 'values' merely allurements prolonging the duration of the
comedy, without, however, bringing the unravelling any closer?" The
"long period of time" which has culminated in an "in vain," without
either goal or purpose, is themost paralysingof thoughts, more
particularly when one sees that one is duped without, however, being
able to resist being duped.***Let us imagine this thought in its worst form: existence, as it is,
without either a purpose or a goal, but inevitably recurring, without
an end in nonentity: "Eternal Recurrence."This is the extremest form of Nihilism: nothing (purposelessness)
eternal!European form of Buddhism: the energy of knowledge and of strength
drives us to such a belief. It is the mostscientificof all
hypotheses. We deny final purposes. If existence had a final purpose it
would have reached it.***It should be understood that what is being aimed at, here, is a
contradiction of Pantheism: for "everything perfect, divine, eternal,"alsoleadsto the belief in Eternal Recurrence.Question: has this
pantheistic and affirmative attitude to all things also been made
possible by morality? At bottom only the moral God has been overcome.
Is there any sense in imagining a God "beyond good and evil"? Would
Pantheism inthissense be possible? Do we withdraw the idea of
purpose from the process, and affirm the process notwithstanding?
This were so if, within that process, something wereattainedevery
moment—and always the same thing. Spinoza won an affirmative position
of this sort, in the sense that every moment, according to him, has
a logical necessity: and he triumphed by means of his fundamentally
logical instinct over a like conformation of the world.***But his case is exceptional. If everyfundamental trait of character,which lies beneath every act, and which finds expression in every
act, were recognised by the individual ashisfundamentaltrait of
character, this individual would be driven to regard every moment of
his existence in general, triumphantly as good. It would simply be
necessary for that fundamental trait of character to be felt in oneself
as something good, valuable, and pleasurable.***Now, in the case of those men and classes of men who were treated
with violence and oppressed by their fellows,moralitysaved life
from despair and from the leap into nonentity:. for impotence in
relation to mankind andnotin relation to Nature is what generates
the most desperate bitterness towards existence. Morality treated the
powerful, the violent, and the "masters" in general, as enemies against
whom the common man must be protected—that is to say, emboldened,
strengthened.Morality has therefore always taught the most profoundhatredandcontemptof the fundamental trait of character of all
rulers—i.e., their Will to Power.To suppress, to deny, and to
decompose this morality, would mean to regard this most thoroughly
detested instinct with the reverse of the old feeling and valuation.
If the sufferer and the oppressed man wereto lose his beliefin his
right to contemn the Will to Power, his position would be desperate.
This would be so if the trait above-mentioned were essential to life,
in which case it would follow that even that will to morality was only
a cloak to this "Will to Power," as are also even that hatred and
contempt. The oppressed man would thenperceive that he standson
the same platformwith the oppressor, and that he has no individual
privilege, nor anyhigher rankthan the latter.***On thecontrary! There is nothing on earth which can have any value,
if it have not a modicum of power—granted, of course, that life itself
is the Will to Power. Morality protected thebotchedandbungledagainst Nihilism, in that it gave every one of them infinite worth,
metaphysical worth, and classed them altogether in one order which did
not correspond with that of worldly power and order of rank: it taught
submission, humility, etc.Admitting that the belief in this morality
be destroyed,the botched and the bungled would no longer have any
comfort, and would perish.Thisperishingseems likeself-annihilation,like an instinctive
selection of that which must be destroyed. Thesymptomsof this
self-destruction of the botched and the bungled: self-vivisection,
poisoning, intoxication, romanticism, and, above all, the instinctive
constraint to acts whereby the powerful are made intomortal
enemies(training, so to speak, one's own hangmen),the will to
destructionas the will of a still deeper instinct—of the instinct of
self-destruction, of the Will to Nonentity.***Nihilism is a sign that the botched and bungledin order to be
destroyed, that, having been deprived of morality, they no longer have
any reason to "resign themselves," that they take up their stand on the
territory of the opposite principle, andwill also exercise powerthemselves, by compelling the powerful to become their hangmen. This
is the European form of Buddhism, thatactive negation,after all
existence has lost its meaning.***It must not be supposed that "poverty" has grown more acute, on the
contrary! "God, morality, resignation" were remedies in the very
deepest stages of misery:activeNihilism made its appearance in
circumstances which were relatively much more favourable. The fact,
alone, that morality is regarded as overcome, presupposes a certain
degree of intellectual culture; while this very culture, for its part,
bears evidence to a certain relative well-being. A certain intellectual
fatigue, brought on by the long struggle concerning philosophical
opinions, and carried to hopeless scepticismagainstphilosophy,
shows moreover that the level of these Nihilists is by no means a
low one. Only think of the conditions in which Buddha appeared! The
teaching of the eternal recurrence would have learned principles to
go upon (just as Buddha's teaching, for instance, had the notion of
causality, etc.).***What do we mean to-day by the words "botched and bungled"? In the
first place, they are usedphysiologicallyand not politically. The
unhealthiest kind of man all over Europe (in all classes) is the soil
out of which Nihilism grows: this species of man will regard eternal
recurrence as damnation—once he is bitten by the thought, he can no
longer recoil before any action. He would not extirpate passively,
but would cause everything to be extirpated which is meaningless
and without a goal to this extent; although it is only a spasm, or
sort of blind rage in the presence of the fact that everything has
existed again and again for an eternity—even this period of Nihilism
and destruction. The value of such acrisisis that itpurifies,that it unites similar elements, and makes them mutually destructive,
that it assigns common duties to men of opposite persuasions, and
brings the weaker and more uncertain among them to the light, thus
taking the first step towards a neworder of rankamong forces
from the standpoint of health: recognising commanders as commanders,
subordinates as subordinates. Naturally irrespective of all the present
forms of society.***What class of men will prove they are strongest in this new order of
things? The most moderate—they who do notrequireany extreme forms
of belief, they who not only admit of, but actually like, a certain
modicum of chance and nonsense; they who can think of man with a very
moderate view of his value, without becoming weak and small on that
account; the most rich in health,who are able to withstand a maximum
amount of sorrow, and who are therefore not so very much afraid of
sorrow—men who arecertain of their power,and who represent with
conscious pride the state of strength to which man has attained.***How could such a man think of Eternal Recurrence?56.The Periods of European Nihilism.The Period of Obscurity: all kinds of groping measures devised to
preserve old institutions and not to arrest the progress of new ones.The Period of Light: men see that old and new are fundamental
contraries; that the old values are born of descending life, and that
the new ones are born of ascending life—that all old idealsare
unfriendly to life (born of decadence and determining it, however
much they may be decked out in the Sunday finery of morality). Weunderstandthe old, but are far from being sufficiently strong for
the new.The Periods of the Three Great Passions: contempt, pity, destruction.The Periods of Catastrophes: the rise of a teaching which will sift
mankind ... which drives the weak to some decision and the strong also.II.CONCERNING THE HISTORY OF EUROPEAN NIHILISM.(a)Modern Gloominess.57.My friends, we had a hard time as youths; we even suffered from
youth itself as though it were a serious disease. This is owing to
the age in which we were born—an age of enormous internal decay and
disintegration which, with all its weakness and even with the best of
its strength, is opposed to the spirit of youth. Disintegration—that
is to say, uncertainty—is peculiar to this age: nothing stands on
solid ground or on a sound faith. People live for the morrow, because
the day-after-to-morrow is doubtful. All our road is slippery and
dangerous, while the ice which still bears us has grown unconscionably
thin: we all feel the mild and gruesome breath of the thaw-wind—soon,
where we are walking, no one will any longerbe ableto stand!58.If this is not an age of decay and of diminishing vitality, it is at
least one of indiscriminate and arbitrary experimentalising—and it is
probable that out of an excess of abortive experiments therehas grown
this general impression, as of decay: and perhaps decay itself.59.Concerning the history of modern gloominess.The state-nomads (officials, etc.): "homeless"—.The break-up of the family.The "good man" as a symptom of exhaustion.Justice as Will to Power (Rearing).Lewdness and neurosis.Black music: whither has real music gone?The anarchist.Contempt of man, loathing.Most profound distinction: whether hunger or satiety is creative? The
first creates theIdeals of Romanticism.Northern unnaturalness.The need of Alcohol: the "need" of the working classes.Philosophical Nihilism.60.The slow advance and rise of the middle and lower classes (including
the lower kind of spirit and body), which was already well under way
before the French Revolution, and would have made the same progress
forward without the latter,—in short, then, the preponderance of the
herd over all herdsmen and bell-wethers,—brings in its train:—(1) Gloominess of spirit (the juxtaposition of a stoical and a
frivolousappearanceof happiness,peculiar to noble cultures, is on
the decline; much suffering is allowed to beseenandheardwhich
formerly was borne in concealment);(2) Moral hypocrisy (a way ofdistinguishingoneself through
morality, but by means of the values of the herd: pity, solicitude,
moderation; and not by means of those virtues which are recognised and
honoured outside the herd's sphere of power);(3) Areallylarge amount of sympathy with both pain and joy (a
feeling of pleasure resulting from being herded together, which is
peculiar to all gregarious animals—"public spirit," "patriotism,"
everything, in fact, which is apart from the individual).61.Our age, with its indiscriminate endeavours to mitigate distress, to
honour it, and to wage war in advance with unpleasant possibilities, is
an age of thepoor.Our "rich people"—theyare the poorest! The
realpurposeof all wealth has been forgotten.62.Criticism of modern man:—"the good man," but corrupted and misled by
bad institutions (tyrants and priests);—reason elevated to a position
of authority;—history is regarded as the surmounting of errors;—the
future is regarded as progress;—the Christian state ("God of the
armies");—Christian sexual intercourse (as marriage);—the realm of
"justice" (the cult of "mankind");—"freedom."Theromanticattitudes of the modern man;—the noble man
(Byron, Victor Hugo, George Sand);—taking the part of the
oppressed and the bungled and the botched: motto for historians and
romancers;—the Stoics of duty;—disinterestedness regarded as art
and as knowledge;—altruism as the most mendacious form of egoism
(utilitarianism), the most sentimental form of egoism.All this savours of the eighteenth century. But it had other
qualities which were not inherited, namely, a certaininsouciance,cheerfulness, elegance, spiritual clearness. The spiritual tempo has
altered; the pleasure which was begotten by spiritual refinement and
clearness has given room to the pleasure of colour, harmony, mass,
reality, etc. etc. Sensuality in spiritual things. In short, it is the
eighteenth century of Rousseau.63.Taken all in all, a considerable amount ofhumanityhas been attained
by our men of to-day. That we feel this is in itself a proof of the
fact that we have become so sensitive in regard to small cases of
distress, that we somewhat unjustly overlook what has been achieved.Here we must make allowances for the fact that a great deal of
decadence is rife, and that, through such eyes, our worldmust appearbad and wretched. But these eyes have always seen in the same way, in
all ages.(1) A certain hypersensitiveness, even in morality.(2) The quantum of bitterness and gloominess,which pessimism bears
with it in its judgments—both together have helped to bring about the
preponderance of the other andoppositepoint of view, that things
are not well with our morality.The fact of credit, of the commerce of the world, and the means of
traffic—are expressions of an extraordinarily mildtrustfulnessin
men.... To that may also be added—(3) The deliverance of science from moral and religious prejudices: a
very good sign, though for the most part misunderstood.In my own way, I am attempting a justification of history.64.The second appearance of Buddhism.—Its precursory signs: the
increase of pity. Spiritual exhaustion. The reduction of all
problems to the question of pleasure and pain. The glory of war
which calls forth a counter-stroke. Just as the sharp demarcation of
nations generates a counter-movement in the form of the most hearty
"Fraternity." The fact that it is impossible for religion to carry on
its work any longer with dogma and fables.Thecatastrophe of Nihilismwill put an end to all this Buddhistic
culture.65.That which is most sorely afflicted to-day is the instinct and will oftradition: all institutions which owe their origin to this instinct,
are opposedto the tastes of the age.... At bottom, nothing is thought
or done which is not calculated to tear up this spirit of tradition
by the roots. Tradition is looked upon as a fatality; it is studied
and acknowledged (in the form of "heredity"), but people will not have
anything to do with it. The extension of one will over long periods
of time, the selection of conditions and valuations which make it
possible to dispose of centuries in advance—this, precisely, is what
is most utterly anti-modern. From which it follows, that disorganising
principles give our age its specific character.66."Be simple"—a demand which, when made to us complicated and
incomprehensible triers of the heart and reins, is a simple
absurdity.... Be natural: but even if we are unnatural—what then?67.The means employed in former times in order to arrive atsimilarly
constitutedand lasting types, throughout long generations: entailed
property and the respect of parents (the origin of the faith in gods
and heroes as ancestors).Now, thesubdivision of propertybelongs to the opposite tendency.
The centralisation of an enormous number of, different interests in one
soul: which,to that end,must be very strong and mutable.68.Why does everything becomemummery.—The modern man is lacking in
unfailing instinct (instinct being understood here to mean that which
is the outcome of along period of activity in the same occupationon
the part of one family of men); the incapability of producing anything
perfect, is simply the result of this lack of instinct: one individual
alone cannot make up for the schooling his ancestors should have
transmitted to him.What a morality or book of law creates: that deep instinct which
rendersautomatismand perfection possible in life and in work.But now we have reached the opposite point; yes, we wanted to reach
it—the most extreme consciousness, through introspection on the part
of man and of history: and thus we are practically most distant from
perfection in Being, doing, and willing: our desires—even our will
to knowledge—shows how prodigiously decadent we are. We are striving
after the very reverse of whatstrong racesandstrong natureswill
have—understanding is anend....That Science is possible in the way in which it is practised to-day,
proves that all elementary instincts,the instincts which ward off
danger and protect life,are no longer active. We no longer save, we
are merely spending the capital of our forefathers, even in the way in
which wepursue knowledge.69.Nihilistic trait.(a)In thenatural sciences("purposelessness"),causality,
mechanism, "conformity to law," an interval, a remnant.(b)Likewise inpolitics: the individual lacks the belief in his
own right, innocence; falsehood rules supreme, as also the worship of
the moment.(d)Likewise inpolitical economy: the abolition of slavery: the
lack of a redeeming class, and ofone who justifies—the rise of
anarchy. "Education"?(d)Likewise inhistory: fatalism, Darwinism; the last attempts at
reconciling reason and Godliness fail. Sentimentality in regard to the
past: biographies can no longer be endured! (Phenomenalism even here:
character regarded as a mask; there are no facts.)(e)Likewise inArt: romanticism and itscounter-stroke(repugnance towards romantic ideals and lies). The latter, morally,
as a sense of greatest truthfulness, but pessimistic. Pure "artists"
(indifference as to the "subject"). (The psychology of the
father-confessor and puritanical psychology—two forms of psychological
romanticism: but also their counter-stroke, the attempt to maintain a
purely artistic attitude towards "men"—but even in this respect no one
dares to make theoppositevaluation.)70.Againstthe teaching of the influence ofenvironmentand external
causes: the power coming from inside is infinitelysuperior;
much that appears like influence acting from without is merely the
subjection of environment to this inner power.Precisely the same environment may be used and interpreted in opposite
ways: there are no facts. A genius isnotexplained by such theories
concerning origins.71."Modernity" regarded in the light of nutrition and digestion.Sensitiveness is infinitely more acute (beneath moral vestments: the
increase of pity), the abundance of different impressions is greater
than ever. Thecosmopolitanismof articles of diet, of literature,
newspapers, forms, tastes, and even landscapes. The speed of this
affluence isprestissimo; impressions are wiped out, and people
instinctively guard against assimilating anything or against taking
anythingseriouslyand "digesting" it; the result is a weakening of
the powers of digestion. There begin a sort ofadaptationto this
accumulation of impressions. Man unlearns the art ofdoing,andall he does is to reactto stimuli coming from his environment.He
spends his strength,partly in the process ofassimilation,partly
indefending himself,and again partly inresponding to stimuli.
Profound enfeeblement of spontaneity:—the historian, the critic, the
analyst, the interpreter, the observer, the collector, the reader,—all
reactive talents,—allscience!Artificialmodificationof one's own nature in order to make it
resemble a "mirror"; one is interested, but only epidermally: this
is systematic coolness, equilibrium, a steadylowtemperature,just beneath the thin surface on which warmth, movement, "storm," and
undulations play.Opposition ofexternalmobility to a certaindead heaviness and
fatigue.72.Where must our modern world be classed—under exhaustion or under
increasing strength? Its multiformity and lack of repose are brought
about by the highest form ofconsciousness.73.Overwork, curiosity and sympathy—ourmodern vices.74.A contribution to the characterisation of "Modernity."—Exaggerated
development of intermediate forms; the decay of types; the break-up of
tradition, schools; the predominance of the instincts (philosophically
prepared: the unconscious has the greater value) after the appearance
of theenfeeblement of will powerand of the will to an endandto
the means thereto.75.A capable artisan or scholar cuts a good figure if he have his pride
in his art, and looks pleasantly and contentedly upon life. On the
other hand, there is no sight more wretched than that of a cobbler or
a schoolmaster who, with the air of a martyr, gives one to understand
that he was reallyborn for something better. There is nothing better
than what is good! and that is: to have a certain kind of capacity and
to use it. This isvirtùin the Italian style of the Renaissance.Nowadays, when the state has a nonsensically oversized belly, in all
fields and branches of work there are "representatives" over and above
the real workman: for instance, in addition to the scholars, there
are the journalists; in addition to the suffering masses, there is a
crowd of jabbering and bragging ne'er-do-wells who "represent" that
suffering—not to speak of the professional politicians who, though
quite satisfied with their lot, stand up in Parliament and, with
strong lungs, "represent" grievances. Our modern life is extremelyexpensive,thanks to the host of middlemen that infest it; whereas
in the city of antiquity, and in many a city of Spain and Italy
to-day, where there is an echo of the ancient spirit, the man himself
comes forward and will have nothing to do with a representative or an
intermediary in the modern style—except perhaps to kick him hence!76.The pre-eminence of themerchantand themiddleman,even in the
most intellectual spheres: the journalist, the "representative," the
historian (as an intermediary between the past and the present), the
exotic and cosmopolitan, the middleman between natural science and
philosophy, the semi-theologians.77.The men I have regarded with the most loathing, heretofore, are the
parasites of intellect: they are to be found everywhere, already, in
our modern Europe, and as a matter of fact their conscience is as light
as it possibly can be. They may be a little turbid, and savour somewhat
of Pessimism, but in the main they are voracious, dirty, dirtying,
stealthy, insinuating, light-fingered gentry, scabby—and as innocent
as all small sinners and microbes are. They live at the expense of
those who have intellect and who distribute it liberally: they know
that it is peculiar to the rich mind to live in a disinterested
fashion, without taking too much petty thought for the morrow, and
to distribute its wealth prodigally. For intellect is a bad domestic
economist, and pays no heed whatever to the fact that everything lives
on it and devours it.78.Modern MummeryThe motleyness of modern men and its charm Essentially a mask and a
sign of boredom.The journalist.The political man (in the "national swindle").Mummery in the arts:—The lack of honesty in preparing and schooling oneself for
them (Fromentin);The Romanticists (their lack of philosophy and science and
their excess in literature);The novelists (Walter Scott, but also the monsters of theNibelung,with their inordinately nervous music);The lyricists."Scientifically."Virtuosos (Jews).The popular ideals are overcome, but not yetin the presence of the
people:The saint, the sage, the prophet.79.The want of discipline in the modern spiritconcealed beneath all
kinds of moral finery.—The show-words are: Toleration (for the
"incapacity of saying yes or no");la largeur de sympathie(= a
third of indifference, a third of curiosity, and a third of morbid
susceptibility); "objectivity" (the lack of personality and of
will, and the inability to "love"); "freedom" in regard to the rule
(Romanticism); "truth" as opposed to falsehood and lying (Naturalism);
the "scientific spirit" (the "human document": or, in plain English,
the serial story which means "addition"—instead of "composition");
"passion" in the place of disorder and intemperance; "depth" in the
place of confusion and the pell-mell of symbols.80.Concerning the criticism of big words.—I am full of mistrust and
malice towards what is called"ideal": this is myPessimism,that
I have recognised to what extent "sublime sentiments" are a source of
evil—that is to say, a belittling and depreciating of man.Every time "progress" is expected to result from an ideal,
disappointment invariably follows; the triumph of an ideal has always
been aretrograde movement.Christianity, revolution, the abolition of slavery, equal rights,
philanthropy, love of peace, justice, truth: all these big words are
only valuable in a struggle, as banners: not as realities, but asshow-words,for something quite different (yea, even quite opposed to
what they mean!).81.The kind of man is known who has fallen in love with the sentence
"tout comprendre à est tout pardonner"It is the weak and, above all,
the disillusioned: if there is something to pardon in everything, there
is also something to contemn! It is the philosophy of disappointment,
which here swathes itself so humanly in pity, and gazes out so sweetly.They are Romanticists, whose faith has gone to pot: now they at least
wish to look on and see how everything vanishes and fades. They call itl'art pour l'art,"objectivity," etc.82.The main symptoms of Pessimism:—Dinners at Magny's; Russian
Pessimism (Tolstoy, Dostoiewsky);æsthetic Pessimism,l'art pour
l'art,"description" (the romantic and the anti-romantic Pessimism);
Pessimism in the theory of knowledge (Schopenhauer: phenomenalism);
anarchical Pessimism; the "religion of pity," Buddhistic preparation;
the Pessimism of culture (exoticness, cosmopolitanism); moral
Pessimism, myself.83."Without the Christian Faith" said Pascal, "you would yourselves
be like nature and history,un monstre et un chaos." We fulfilled
this prophecy: once the weak and optimistic eighteenth century hadembellishedandrationalisedman.SchopenhauerandPascal.—I none essential point, Schopenhauer is
the first whotakes up Pascal'smovement again:un monstre et un
chaos,consequently something that must be negatived ... history,
nature, and man himself!"Our inability to know the truthis the result of ourcorruption,of our moraldecay" says Pascal. And Schopenhauer says essentially
the same. "The more profound the corruption of reason is, the
more necessary is the doctrine of salvation"—or, putting it into
Schopenhauerian phraseology, negation.84.Schopenhauer as an epigone(state of affairs before the
Revolution):—Pity, sensuality, art, weakness of will, Catholicism
of the most intellectual desires—that is, at bottom, the good old
eighteenth century.Schopenhauer'sfundamental misunderstanding of thewill(just
as though passion, instinct, and desire were the essential factors
of will) is typical: the depreciation of the will to the extent of
mistaking it altogether. Likewise the hatred of willing: the attempt at
seeing something superior—yea, even superiority itself, and that which
really matters, in non-willing, in the "subject-beingwithoutaim or
intention." Great symptom offatigue or of the weakness of will: for
this, in reality, is what treats the passions as master, and directs
them as to the way and to the measure....85.The undignified attempt has been made to regard Wagner and Schopenhauer
as types of the mentally unsound: an infinitely more essential
understanding of the matter would have been gained if the exact
decadent type which each of them represents had been scientifically and
accurately defined.86.In my opinion, Henrik Ibsen has become very German. With all his
robust idealism and "Will to Truth," he never dared to ring himself
free from moral-illusionism which says "freedom," and will not admit,
even to itself, what freedom is: the second stage in the metamorphosis
of the "Will to Power" in him who lacks it. In the first stage, one
demands justice at the hands of those who have power. In the second,
one speaks of "freedom,"that is to say, one wishes to "shake oneself
free" from those who have power. In the third stage, one speaks of
"equal rights"—that is to say, so long as one is not a predominant
personality one wishes to prevent one's competitors from growing in
power.87.The Decline ofProtestantism: theoretically and historically
understood as a half-measure. Undeniable predominance of Catholicism
to-day: Protestant feeling is so dead that the strongestanti-Protestantmovements (Wagner'sParsifal,for instance) are no
longer regarded as such. The whole of the more elevated intellectuality
in France isCatholicin instinct; Bismarck recognised that there was
no longer any such thing as Protestantism.88.Protestantism, that spiritually unclean and tiresome form of decadence,
in which Christianity has known how to survive in the mediocre North,
is something incomplete and complexly valuable for knowledge, in so far
as it was able to bring experiences of different kinds and origins into
the same heads.89.What has the German spirit not made out of Christianity! And, to refer
to Protestantism again, how much beer is there not still in Protestant
Christianity! Can a crasser, more indolent, and more lounging form
of Christian beliefbe imagined, than that of the average German
Protestant?... It is indeed a very humble Christianity. I call it
the Homœopathy of Christianity! I am reminded that, to-day, there
also exists a less humble sort of Protestantism; it is taught by
royal chaplains and anti-Semitic speculators: but nobody has ever
maintained that any "spirit" "hovers" over these waters. It is merely
a less respectable form of Christian faith, not by any means a more
comprehensible one.90.Progress.—Let us be on our guard lest we deceive ourselves! Time
flies forward apace,—we would fain believe that everything flies
forward with it,—that evolution is an advancing development.... That
is the appearance of things which deceives the most circumspect. But
the nineteenth century shows no advance whatever on the sixteenth:
and the German spirit of 1888 is an example of a backward movement
when compared with that of 1788.... Mankind does not advance, it does
not even exist. The aspect of the whole is much more like that of a
huge experimenting workshop where some things in all ages succeed,
while an incalculable number of things fail; where all order, logic,
co-ordination, and responsibility is lacking. How dare we blink the
fact that the rise of Christianity is a decadent movement?—that the
German Reformation was a recrudescence of Christian barbarism?—that
the Revolution destroyed the instinct for an organisationof society
on a large scale?... Man is not an example of progress as compared with
animals: the tender son of culture is an abortion compared with the
Arab or the Corsican; the Chinaman is a more successful type—that is
to say, richer in sustaining power than the European.(b)The Last Centuries.91.Gloominess and pessimistic influence necessarily follow in the wake of
enlightenment. Towards 1770 a falling-off in cheerfulness was already
noticeable; women, with that very feminine instinct which always
defends virtue, believed that immorality was the cause of it. Galiani
hit the bull's eye: he quotes Voltaire's verse: