This was also the case in regard to the first Christian community (as
also the Jewish), the primary condition of which was the absolutelyunpoliticalJewish society. Christianity could grow only upon the
soil of Judaism—that is to say, among a people that had already
renounced the political life, and which led a sort of parasitic
existence within the Roman sphere of government, Christianity goes a
stepfarther: it allows men to "emasculate" themselves even more; the
circumstances actually favour their doing so.—Natureisexpelledfrom morality when it is said, "Love ye your enemies": forNature'sinjunction, "Ye shallloveyour neighbour andhateyour enemy,"
has now become senseless in the law (in instinct); now, eventhe love
a man feels for his neighbourmust first be based upon something (a
sort of loveof God).Godis introduced everywhere, andutilityis withdrawn; the naturaloriginof morality is denied everywhere:
theveneration of Nature,which lies inacknowledging a natural
morality,isdestroyedto the roots....Whence comes theseductive charmof this emasculate ideal of man? Why
are we notdisgustedby it, just as we are disgusted at the thought
of a eunuch?... The answer is obvious: it is not the voice of the
eunuch that revolts us, despite the cruel mutilation of which it is the
result; for, as a matter of fact, it has grown sweeter.... And owing to
the very fact that the "male organ" has been amputated from virtue, its
voice now has a feminine ring, which, formerly, was not to be discerned.On the other hand, we have only to think of the terrible hardness,
dangers, and accidents to which a life of manly virtues leads—the
life of a Corsican, even at the present day, or that of a heathen Arab
(which resembles the Corsican's life even to the smallest detail:
the Arab's songs might have been written by Corsicans)—in order to
perceive how the most robust type of man was fascinated and moved by
the voluptuous ring of this "goodness" and "purity." ... A pastoral
melody ... an idyll ... the "good man": such things have most effect in
ages when tragedy is abroad.***With this, we have realised to what extent the "idealist" (the ideal
eunuch) also proceeds from adefinite reality and is not merely a
visionary.... He has perceived precisely that, for his kind of reality,
a brutal injunction of the sort which prohibits certain actions has no
sense (because the instinct which would urge him to these actions isweakened,thanks to a long need of practice, and of compulsion to
practise). The castrator formulates a host of new self-preservative
measures for a perfectly definite species of men: in this sense he is
a realist. Themeansto which he has recourse for establishing his
legislation, are the same as those of ancient legislators: he appeals
to all authorities, to "God," and he exploits the notions "guilt and
punishment"—that is to say, he avails himself of the whole of the
older ideal, but interprets it differently; for instance: punishment is
given a place in the inner self (it is called the pang of conscience).In practice this kind of manmeets with his endthe moment the
exceptional conditions favouring his existence cease to prevail—a sort
of insular happiness, like that of Tahiti, and of the little Jews in
the Roman provinces. Their onlynaturalfoe is the soil from which
they spring: they must wage war against that, and once more give theiroffensiveanddefensivepassions rope in order to be equal to
it: their opponents are the adherents of the old ideal (this kind of
hostility is shown on a grand scale by Paul in relation to Judaism, and
by Luther in relation to the priestly ascetic ideal). The mildest form
of this antagonism is certainly that of the first Buddhists; perhaps
nothing has given rise to so much work, as the enfeeblement anddiscouragement of the feeling ofantagonism.The struggle against
resentment almost seems the Buddhist's first duty; thus only is hispeaceof soul secured. To isolate oneself without bitterness, this
presupposes the existence of a surprisingly mild and sweet order of
men,—saints....***TheAstuteness of moral castration.—How is war waged against
the virile passions and valuations? No violent physical means are
available; the war must therefore be one of ruses, spells, and lies—in
short, a "spiritual war."First recipe: One appropriates virtue in general, and makes it the main
feature of one's ideal; the older ideal is denied and declared to bethe reverse of all ideals.Slander has to be carried to a fine art
for this purpose.Second recipe: A type of man is set up as a generalstandard; and
this is projected into all things, behind all things, and behind the
destiny of all things—as God.Third recipe: The opponents of one's ideal are declared to be the
opponents of God; one arrogates to oneself arightto great pathos,
to power, and a right to curse and to bless.Fourth recipe: All suffering, all gruesome, terrible, and fatal things
are declared to be the results of opposition toonesideal—all
suffering ispunishmenteven in the case of one's adherents (except
it be a trial, etc.).Fifth recipe: One goes so far as to regard Nature as the reverse of
one's ideal, and the lengthysojourn amid natural conditions is
considered a great trial of patience—a sort of martyrdom; one studies
contempt, both in one's attitudes and one's looks towards all "natural
things."Sixth recipe: The triumph of anti-naturalism and ideal castration,
the triumph of the world of the pure, good, sinless, and blessed, is
projected into the future as the consummation, the finale, the great
hope, and the "Coming of the Kingdom of God."I hope that one may still be allowed tolaughat this artificial
hoisting up of a small species of man to the position of an absolute
standard of all things?205.What I do not at all like in Jesus of Nazareth and His Apostle Paul,
is that theystuffed so much into the heads of paltry people,as
if their modest virtues were worth so much ado. We have had to pay
dearly for it all; for they brought the most valuable qualities of both
virtue and man into ill repute; they set the guilty conscience and the
self-respect of noble souls at loggerheads, and they led thebraver,
more magnanimous, more daring, and more excessivetendencies of strong
souls astray—even to self-destruction.206.In the New Testament, and especially in the Gospels, I discern
absolutely no sign of a "Divine" voice: but rather anindirect
formof the mostsubterranean fury, both in slander and
destructiveness—one of the most dishonest forms of hatred. It lacksallknowledge of the qualities of ahigher nature.It makes an
impudent abuse of all kinds of plausibilities, and the whole stock of
proverbs is used up and foisted upon one in its pages. Was it necessary
to make aGodcome in order to appeal to those publicans and to say
to them, etc. etc.?Nothing could be more vulgar than this struggle with thePharisees,carried on with a host of absurd and unpractical moral pretences; the
mob, of course, has always been entertained by such feats. Fancy the
reproach of "hypocrisy!" coming from those lips! Nothing could be more
vulgar than this treatment of one's opponents—a most insidious sign of
nobility or itsreverse....207.Primitive Christianity is theabolitionof theState: it prohibits
oaths, military service, courts of justice, self-defence or the defence
of a community, and denies the difference between fellow-countrymen and
strangers, as also theorder of castes.Christs example; He does not withstand those who ill-treat Him; He
does not defend Himself; He does more, He "offers the left cheek"
(to the demand: "Tell us whether thou be the Christ?" He replies:
"Hereafter shall ye see the Son of man sitting on the right hand of
power, and coming in the clouds of heaven"). He forbids His disciples
to defend Him; He calls attention tothe fact that He could get help
if He wished to, butwillnot.Christianity also means theabolition of society,it prizes
everything that society despises, its very growth takes place among the
outcasts, the condemned, and the leprous of all kinds, as also among
"publicans," "sinners," prostitutes, and the most foolish of men (the
"fisher folk "); it despises the rich, the scholarly, the noble, the
virtuous, and the "punctilious." ...208.The war against the noble and the powerful, as it is waged in the New
Testament, is reminiscent of Reynard the Fox and his methods: butplusthe Christian unction and the more absolute refusal to recognise
one's own craftiness.209.The Gospel is the announcement that the road to happiness lies open for
the lowly and the poor—that all one has to do is to emancipate one's
self from all institutions, traditions, and the tutelage of the higher
classes. Thus Christianity is no more than thetypical teaching of
Socialists.Property, acquisitions, mother-country, status and rank, tribunals,
the police, the State, the Church, Education, Art, militarism: all
these are so many obstacles in the way of happiness, so many mistakes,
snares, and devil's artifices, on which the Gospel passes sentence—all
this is typical of socialistic doctrines.Behind all this there is the outburst, theexplosion, of a
concentrated loathing of the "masters,"—the instinct which discerns
the happiness of freedom after such long oppression.... (Mostly a
symptom of the fact that the inferior classes have been treated too
humanely, that their tongues already taste a joy which is forbidden
them.... It is not hunger that provokes revolutions, but the fact that
the mob have contracted an appetiteen mangeant....)210.Let theNew Testament only be read as a book of seduction: in it
virtue is appropriated, with the idea that public opinion is best
won with it,—and as a matter of fact it is a very modest kind ofvirtue,which recognises only the ideal gregarious animal and nothing
more (including, of course, the herdsmen): a puny, soft, benevolent,
helpful, and gushingly-satisfied kind of virtue which to the outside
world is quite devoid of pretensions,—and which separates the "world"
entirely from itself. Thecrassest arrogancewhich fancies that the
destiny of man turns around it, and it alone, and that on the one side
the community of believers represents what is right, and on the other
the world represents what is false and eternally to be reproved and
rejected. The mostimbecile hatredof all things in power, which,
however, never goes so far as to touch these things. A kind ofinner
detachmentwhich, outwardly, leaves everything as it was (servitude
and slavery; and knowing how to converteverythinginto a means of
serving God and virtue).211.Christianity is possible as themost privateform of life; it
presupposes the existence of a narrow, isolated, and absolutely
unpolitical society—it belongs to the conventicle. On the other hand,
a "ChristianState," "Christian politics," are pieces of downright
impudence; they are lies, like, for instance, a Christian leadership
of an army, which in the end regards "the God of hosts" as chief of
the staff. Even the Papacy has never been able to carry on politics
in a Christian way...; and when Reformers indulge in politics, as
Luther did, it is well known that they are just as ardent followers of
Machiavelli as any other immoralists or tyrants.212.Christianity is still possible at any moment. It is not bound to any
one of the impudent dogmas that have adorned themselves with its name:
it needs neither the teaching of thepersonal God,nor ofsin,nor ofimmortality,nor ofredemption,nor offaith; it has
absolutely no need whatever of metaphysics, and it needs asceticism and
Christian "natural science" still less. Christianity is amethod of
life,not a system of belief. It tells us how we should behave, not
what we should believe.He who says to-day: "I refuse to be a soldier," "I care not for
tribunals," "I lay no claim to the services of the police," "I will
not do anything that disturbs the peace within me:and if I must
suffer on that account, nothing can so well maintain my inward peace as
suffering"—such a man would be a Christian.213.Concerning the history of Christianity.—Continual change of
environment: Christian teaching is thus continually changing itscentre of gravity.The favouring oflowandpaltrypeople....
The development ofCaritas....The type "Christian" gradually
adopts everything that it originally rejected (and in the rejection
of which it asserted its right to exist). The Christian becomes a
citizen, a soldier, a judge, a workman, a merchant, a scholar, a
theologian, a priest, a philosopher, a farmer, an artist, a patriot,
a politician, a prince ... he re-enters all thosedepartments of
active lifewhich he had forsworn (he defends himself, he establishes
tribunals, he punishes, he swears, he differentiates between people
and people, he contemns, and he shows anger). The whole life of the
Christian is ultimately exactly that lifefrom which Christ preached
deliverance....The Church is just as much a factor in thetriumphof the Antichrist, as the modern State and modern Nationalism.... The
Church is the barbarisation of Christianity.214.Among the powers that have masteredChristianityare: Judaism
(Paul); Platonism (Augustine); The cult of mystery (the teaching of
salvation,the emblem of the "cross"); Asceticism (hostility towards
"Nature," "Reason," the "senses,"—the Orient ...).215.Christianity is a denaturalisation of gregarious morality: under the
power of the most complete misapprehensions and self-deceptions.
Democracy is a more natural form of it, and less sown with falsehood.
It is a fact that the oppressed, the low, and whole mob of slaves and
half-castes,will prevail.First step: they make themselves free—they detach themselves, at
first in fancy only; they recognise each other; they make themselves
paramount.Second step: they enter the lists, they demand acknowledgment, equal
rights, "Justice."Third step: they demand privileges (they draw the representatives of
power over to their side).Fourth step: theyalonewant all power, and theyhaveit.There arethree elementsin Christianity which must be distinguished:(a)the oppressed of all kinds,(b)the mediocre of all kinds,(c)the dissatisfied and diseased of all kinds. Thefirststruggle
against the politically noble and their ideal; the second contend with
the exceptions and those who are in any way privileged (mentally or
physically); the third oppose thenatural instinctof the happy and
the sound.Whenever a triumph is achieved, the secondelement steps to the fore;
for then Christianity has won over the sound and happy to its side
(as warriors in its cause), likewise the powerful (interested to this
extent in the conquest of the crowd)—and now it is thegregarious
instinct,thatmediocre naturewhich is valuable in every respect,
that now gets its highest sanction through Christianity. This mediocre
nature ultimately becomes so conscious of itself (gains such courage
in regard to its own opinions), that it arrogates to itself evenpolitical power....Democracy is Christianitymade natural: a sort of "return to Nature,"
once Christianity, owing to extreme anti-naturalness, might have been
overcome by the opposite valuation. Result: the aristocratic ideal
begins tolose its natural character("the higher man," "noble,"
"artist," "passion," "knowledge"; Romanticism as the cult of the
exceptional, genius, etc. etc.).216.When the "masters" may also become Christians.—It is of the nature
of acommunity(race, family, herd, tribe) to regard all those
conditions and aspirations which favour its survival, as in themselvesvaluable; for instance: obedience, mutual assistance, respect,
moderation, pity—as also, tosuppresseverything that happens to
stand in the way of the above.It is likewise of the nature of therulers(whether they are
individuals or classes) to patronise and applaud those virtues which
maketheir subjectsamenableandsubmissive—conditions and
passions which may be utterly different from their own.Thegregarious instinctand theinstinct of the rulerssometimesagreein approving of a certain number of qualities and
conditions,—but for different reasons: the first do so out of direct
egoism, the second out of indirect egoism.The submission to Christianity on the part of master racesis
essentially the result of the conviction that Christianity is areligion for the herd,that it teaches obedience: in short, that
Christians are more easily ruled than non-Christians. With a hint of
this nature, the Pope, even nowadays, recommends Christian propaganda
to the ruling Sovereign of China.It should also be added that the seductive power of the Christian ideal
works most strongly upon natures that love danger, adventure, and
contrasts; that love everythingthat entails a risk,and wherewith anon plus ultraof powerful feeling may be attained. In this respect,
one has only to think of Saint Theresa, surrounded by the heroic
instincts of her brothers:—Christianity appears in those circumstances
as a dissipation of the will, as strength of will, as a will that is
Quixotic.3. Christian Ideals.217.War against theChristian ideal,against the doctrine of
"blessedness" and "salvation" as the aims of life, against the
supremacy of the fools, of the pure in heart, of the suffering and of
the botched!When and where has any man,of any note at all,resembled the
Christian ideal?—at least in the eyes of those who are psychologists
and triers of the heart and reins. Look at all Plutarch's heroes!218.Our claim to superiority: we live in an age ofComparisons; we
are able to calculate as men have never yet calculated; in every way
we are history become self-conscious. We enjoy things in a different
way; we suffer in a different way: our instinctive activity is the
comparison of an enormous variety of things. We understand everything;
we experience everything, we no longer have a hostile feeling left
within us. However disastrous the results may be to ourselves, our
plunging and almost lustful inquisitiveness, attacks, unabashed, the
most dangerous of subjects...."Everything is good"—it gives us pain to say "nay" to anything. We
suffer when we feel that we are sufficiently foolish to make a definite
stand against anything.... At bottom, it is we scholars who to-day are
fulfilling Christ's teaching most thoroughly.219.We cannot suppress a certain irony when we contemplate those who think
they have overcome Christianity by means of modern natural science.
Christian values are by no means overcome bysuch people. "Christ on
the cross" is still the most sublime symbol—even now....220.The two great Nihilistic movements are:(a)Buddhism,(b)Christianity. The latter has only just about reached a state of
culture in which it can fulfil its original object,—it has found itslevel,—and now it can manifest itselfwithout disguise.....221.We havere-establishedthe Christian ideal, it now only remainsto
determineits value.(1) Which values does itdeny? What doesthe ideal that opposes itstand for?—Pride, pathos of distance, great responsibility, exuberant
spirits, splendid animalism, the instincts of war and of conquest;
the deification of passion, revenge, cunning, anger, voluptuousness,
adventure, knowledge—thenoble idealis denied: the beauty, wisdom,
power, pomp, and awfulness of the type man: the man who postulates
aims, the "future" man (here Christianity presents itself as thelogical resultofJudaism).(2)Can it be realised?—Yes, of course, when the climatic conditions
are favourable—as in the case of the Indian ideal. Both neglect the
factorwork.—It separates a creature from a people, a state, a
civilised community, and jurisdiction; it rejects education, wisdom,
the cultivation of good manners, acquisition and commerce; it cuts
adrifteverything which is of use and value to men—by means of an
idiosyncrasy of sentiment itisolatesa man. It is non-political,
anti-national, neither aggressive nor defensive,—and only possible
within a strictly-ordered State or state of society, which allows theseholy parasitesto flourish at the cost of their neighbours.....(3) It has now become the will to behappy—and nothing else!
"Blessedness" stands for something self-evident, that no longer
requires any justification—everything else (the way to live and let
live) is only a means to an end....But what follows is the result of alow order of thought,the fear of
pain, of defilement, of corruption, is great enough to provide ample
grounds for allowing everything to go to the dogs.... This is apoorway of thinking, and is the sign of an exhausted race; wemustnot
allow ourselves to be deceived. ("Become as little children." Naturesof the same order: Francis of Assisi, neurotic, epileptic, visionary,
like Jesus.)222.Thehigherman distinguishes himself from thelowerby his
fearlessness and his readiness to challenge misfortune: it is a
sign ofdegenerationwhen eudemonistic values begin to prevail
(physiological fatigue and enfeeblement of will-power). Christianity,
with its prospect of "blessedness," is the typical attitude of mind of
a suffering and impoverished species of man. Abundant strength will be
active, will suffer, and will go under: to itthe bigotry of Christian
salvation is bad music and hieratic posing and vexation.223.Poverty, humility, and chastityare dangerous and slanderous ideals;
but like poisons, which are useful cures in the case of certain
diseases, they were also necessary in the time of the Roman Empire.All ideals are dangerous: because they lower and brand realities; they
are all poisons, but occasionally indispensable as cures.224.God created man, happy, idle, innocent, and immortal: our actual life
is a false, decadent, and sinful existence, a punishment.... Suffering,
struggle, work, and death are raised as objections against life, they
make life questionable, unnatural—something that must cease, and for
which one not only requires but alsohas—remedies!Since the time of Adam, man has been in an abnormal state: God
Himself delivered up His Son for Adam's sin, in order to put an end
to the abnormal condition of things: the natural character of life
is acurse; to those who believe in Him, Christ restores normal
life: He makes them happy, idle, and innocent. But the world did not
become fruitful without labour; women do not bear children without
pain; illness has not ceased: believers are served just as badly as
unbelievers in this respect. All that has happenedis, that man is
delivered fromdeathandsin—two assertions which allow of no
verification, and which are therefore emphasised by the Church with
more than usual heartiness. "He is free from sin,"—not owing to
his own efforts, not owing to a vigorous struggle on his part, butredeemed by the death of the Saviour,—consequently, perfectly
innocent and paradisaical.Actuallife is nothing more than an illusion (that is to say, a
deception, an insanity). The whole of struggling, fighting, and
real existence—so full of light and shade, is only bad and false:
everybody's duty is to bedeliveredfrom it."Man, innocent, idle, immortal, and happy"—this concept, which is
the object of the "most supreme desires," must be criticised before
anything else. Why should guilt, work, death, and pain (and,from
the Christian point of view, alsoknowledge...) becontraryto
all supreme desires?—The lazy Christian notions: "blessedness,"
"innocence," "immortality."225.The eccentric concept "holiness" does not exist—"God" and "man" have
not been divorced from each other. "Miracles" do not exist—such
spheres do not exist: the only one to be considered is the
"intellectual" (that is to say, the symbolically-psychological). As
decadence: a counterpart to "Epicureanism." ... Paradise according to
Greek notions was only "Epicurus' Garden."A life of this sort lacks a purpose: itstrives afternothing;—a
form of the "Epicurean gods"—there is no longer any reason to aim at
anything,—not even at having children:—everything has been done.226.They despised the body: they did not reckon with it: nay, more—they
treated it as an enemy. It was their delirium to think that a man
could carry a "beautiful soul" about in a body that was a cadaverous
abortion.... In order to inoculate others with this insanity they
had to present the concept "beautiful soul" in a different way, and
to transvalue the natural value, until, at last, a pale, sickly,
idiotically exalted creature, something angelic, some extreme
perfection and transfiguration was declared to be the higher man.227.Ignorance in matters psychological.—The Christian has no nervous
system;—contempt for, and deliberate and wilful turning away from, the
demands of the body, and thenakedbody; it is assumed that all this
is in keeping with man's nature, andmust perforce work the ultimate
good of the soul;—all functions of the body are systematically
reduced to moral values; illness itself is regarded as determined by
morality, it is held to be the result of sin, or it is a trial or a
state of salvation, through which man becomes more perfect than he
could become in a stateof health (Pascal's idea); under certain
circumstances, there are wilful attempts at inducing illness.228.What in sooth is this struggle "against Nature" on the part of the
Christian? We shall not, of course, let ourselves be deceived by
his words and explanations. It is Nature against something which is
also Nature. With many, it is fear; with others, it is loathing;
with yet others, it is the sign of a certain intellectuality, the
love of a bloodless and passionless ideal; and in the case of the
most superior men, it is love of an abstract Nature—these try to
live up to their ideal. It is easily understood that humiliation in
the place of self-esteem, anxious cautiousness towards the passions,
emancipation from the usual duties (whereby, a higher notion of rank is
created), the incitement to constant war on behalf of enormous issues,
habituation to effusiveness of feelings—all this goes to constitute
a type: in such a type thehypersensitivenessof a perishing body
preponderates; but the nervousness and the inspirations it engenders
areinterpreteddifferently. Thetasteof this kind of creature
tends either (1) to subtilise, (2) to indulge in bombastic eloquence,
or (3) to go in for extreme feelings. The natural inclinationsdoget satisfied, but they are interpreted in a new way; for instance,
as "justification before God," "the feeling of redemption through
grace," every undeniablefeeling of pleasurebecomes (interpreted
in this way!) pride, voluptuousness,etc. General problem: what will
become of the man who slanders and practically denies and belittles
what is natural? As a matter of fact, the Christian is an example of
exaggerated self-control: in order to tame his passions, he seems to
find it necessary to extirpate or crucify them.229.Man did not know himself physiologically throughout the ages his
history covers; he does not even know himself now. The knowledge, for
instance, that man has a nervous system (but no "soul") is still the
privilege of the most educated people. But man is not satisfied, in
this respect, to say he does not know. A man must be very superior to
be able to say: "I do not know this,"—that is to say, to be able to
admit his ignorance.Suppose he is in pain or in a good mood, he never questions that he
can find the reason of either condition if only he seeks.... In truth,
he cannot find the reason; for he does not even suspect where it
lies.... What happens?... He takes theresultof his condition for
itscause; for instance, if he should undertake some work (really
undertaken because his good mood gave him the courage to do so) and
carry it through successfully: behold, the work itself is thereasonof his good mood.... As a matter of fact, his success was determined by
the same cause as that which brought about his good mood—that is to
say, the happy co-ordination of physiological powers and functions.He feels bad:consequentlyhe cannot overcome a care, a scruple,
or an attitude of self-criticism.... He really fancies that his
disagreeable condition is the result of his scruple, of his "sin," or
of his "self-criticism."But after profound exhaustion and prostration, a state of recovery sets
in. "How is it possible that I can feel so free, so happy? It is a
miracle; only a God could have effected this change."—Conclusion: "He
has forgiven my sin." ...From this follow certain practices: in order to provoke feelings of
sinfulness and to prepare the way for crushed spirits it is necessary
to induce a condition of morbidity and nervousness in the body. The
methods of doing this are well known. Of course, nobody suspects
the causal logic of the fact: themacerationof thefleshis
interpreted religiously, it seems like an end in itself, whereas it
is no more than ameansof bringing about that morbid state of
indigestion which is known as repentance (the "fixed idea" of sin, the
hypnotising of the hen by-means of the chalk-line "sin").The mishandling of the body prepares the ground for the required range
of "guilty feelings"—that is to say, for that general state of pain
whichdemands an explanation....On the other hand, themethodof "salvation" may also develop
from the above: every dissipation of the feelings, whether prayers,
movements, attitudes, or oaths, has been provoked, and exhaustion
follows; very often it is acute, or itappears in the form of
epilepsy. And behind this condition of deep somnolence there come signs
of recovery—or, in religious parlance, "Salvation."230.Formerly, the conditions and results ofphysiological exhaustionwere
considered more important than healthy conditions and their results,
and this was owing to the suddenness, fearfulness, and mysteriousness
of the former. Men were terrified by themselves, and postulated the
existence of ahigherworld. People have ascribed the origin of the
idea of two worlds—one this side of the grave and the other beyond
it—to sleep and dreams, to shadows, to night, and to the fear of
Nature: but the symptoms of physiological exhaustion should, above all,
have been considered.Ancient religions have quite special methods of disciplining the
pious into states of exhaustion, in which theymustexperience such
things.... The idea was, that one entered into a new order of things,
where everything ceases to be known.—Thesemblanceof a higher
power....231.Sleep is the result of every kind of exhaustion; exhaustion follows
upon all excessive excitement....In all pessimistic religions and philosophies there is a yearning for
sleep; the very notion "sleep" is deified and worshipped.In this case the exhaustion is racial; sleepregarded psychologically
is only a symbol of a much deeper and longercompulsion to rest....
In praxiit is death which rules here in the seductive image of its
brother sleep....232.The whole of the Christian training in repentance and redemption may
be regarded as afolie circulairearbitrarily produced; though,
of course, it can be produced only in people who are predisposed to
it—that is to say, who have morbid tendencies in their constitutions.233.Against remorse and its purely psychical treatment.—To be unable
to have done with an experience is already a sign of decadence.
This reopening of old wounds, this wallowing in self-contempt and
depression, is an additional form of disease; no "salvation of the
soul" ever results from it, but only a new kind of spiritual illness....These "conditions of salvation" of which the Christian is conscious are
merely variations of the same diseased state—the interpretation of an
attack of epilepsy by means of a particular formula which is provided,notby science, but by religious mania.When a man is ill his verygoodnessis sickly.... By far the
greatest portion of the psychical apparatus which Christianity has
used, is now classed among the various forms of hysteria and epilepsy.The whole process of spiritual healing must be remodelled on a
physiological basis: the "sting of conscience" as such is an obstacle
in the way of recovery—as soon as possible the attempt must be made
to counterbalance everything by means of new actions, so that there
may be an escape from the morbidness ofself-torture....The purely
psychical practices of the Church and of the various sects should be
decried as dangerous to the health. No invalid is ever cured by prayers
or by the exorcising of evil spirits: the states of "repose" which
follow upon such methods of treatment, by no means inspire confidence,
in the psychological sense....A man ishealthywhen he can laugh at the seriousness and ardour with
which he has allowed himself to behypnotisedto any extent by any
detail in his life—when his remorse seems to him like the action of a
dog biting a stone—when he is ashamed of his repentance.The purely psychological and religious practices, which have existed
hitherto, only led to analteration in the symptoms: according to
them a man had recovered when he bowed before the cross, and swore
that in future he would be a good man.... But a criminal, who, with
a certain gloomy seriousness cleaves to his fate and refuses to
malign his deed once it is done, has morespiritual health....The criminals with whom Dostoiewsky associated in prison, were all,
without exception, unbroken natures,—are they not a hundred times more
valuable than a "broken-spirited" Christian?(For the treatment of pangs of conscience I recommend Mitchell's
Treatment.[2])[2]TRANSLATOR'S NOTE.—InThe New Sydenham Society's Lexicon
of Medicine and the Allied Sciences,the following description of
Mitchell's treatment is to be found: "A method of treating cases of
neurasthenia and hysteria ... by removal from home, rest in bed,
massage twice a day, electrical excitation of the muscles, and
excessive feeding, at first with milk."234.Apang of consciencein a man is a sign that his character is not
yet equal to hisdeed.There is such a thing as a pang of conscience
aftergood deeds: in this case it is their unfamiliarity, their
incompatibility with an old environment.235.Against remorse.—I do not like this form of cowardice in regard to
one's own actions, one must not leave one's self in the lurch under
the pressure of sudden shame or distress. Extreme pride is much more
fitting here. What is the good of it all in the end! No deed gets
undone because it is regretted, no more than because it is "forgiven"
or "expiated." A man must be a theologian in order to believe in
a power that erases faults: we immoralists prefer to disbelieve
in "faults." We believe that all deeds, of what kind soever, are
identically the same at root; just as deeds which turnagainstus
maybe useful from an economical point of view, and evengenerally
desirable.In certain individual cases, we admit that we might well
have beenspareda given action; the circumstances alone predisposed
us in its favour. Which of us, iffavouredby circumstances, would
not already have committed every possible crime?... That is why one
should never say: "Thou shouldst never have done such and such a
thing," but only: "How strange it is that I have not done such and
such a thing hundreds of times already!"—As a matter of fact, only
a very small number of acts aretypicalacts and real epitomes of
a personality, and seeing what a small number of people really are
personalities, a single act very rarelycharacterisesa man. Acts
are mostly dictated by circumstances; they are superficial or merely
reflex movements performed in response to a stimulus, long before the
depths of our beings are affected or consulted in the matter. A fit of
temper, a gesture, a blow with a knife: how little of the individual
resides in these acts!—A deed very often brings a sort of stupor or
feeling of constraint in its wake: so that the agent feels almost
spellbound at its recollection, or as though hebelonged to it,and were not an independent creature. This mental disorder, which is
a form of hypnotism, must be resisted at all costs: surely a single
deed, whatever it be, when it is compared with all one has done, isnothing,and may be deducted from the sum without making the account
wrong. The unfair interest which society manifests in controlling the
whole of our livesin one direction, as though the very purpose of its
existence were to cultivate a certain individual act, should not infect
the man of action: but unfortunately this happens almost continually.
The reason of this is, that every deed, if followed by unexpected
consequences, leads to a certain mental disturbance, no matter whether
the consequences be good or bad. Behold a lover who has been given a
promise, or a poet while he is receiving applause from an audience:
as far asintellectual torporis concerned, these men are in no way
different from the anarchist who is suddenly confronted by a detective
bearing a search warrant.There are some acts which areunworthyof us: acts which, if they
were regarded as typical, would set us down as belonging to a lower
class of man. The one fault that has to be avoided here, is to regard
them as typical. There is another kind of act of whichweare
unworthy: exceptional acts, born of a particular abundance of happiness
and health; they are the highest waves of our spring tides, driven to
an unusual height by a storm—an accident: such acts and "deeds" are
also not typical. An artist should never be judged according to the
measure of his works.236.A. In proportion as Christianity seems necessary to-day, man is still
wild and fatal....B. In another sense, it is not necessary, but extremely dangerous,
though it is captivating andseductive, because it corresponds with
themorbidcharacter of whole classes and types of modern humanity,
... they simply follow their inclinations when they aspire to
Christianity—they are decadents of all kinds.A and B must be kept very sharply apart. In thecase of A,Christianity is a cure, or at least a taming process (under certain
circumstances it serves the purpose of making people ill: and this is
sometimes useful as a means of subduing savage and brutal natures).
In thecase of B,it is a symptom of illness itself, it renders the
state of decadencemore acute; in this case it stands opposed to
acorroboratingsystem of treatment, it is the invalid's instinct
standingagainstthat which would be most salutary to him.237.On one side there are theserious,thedignified,andreflectivepeople: and on the other the barbarous, the unclean, and the
irresponsible beasts: it is merely a question oftaming animals—and
in this case the tamer must be hard, terrible, and awe-inspiring, at
least to his beasts.All essential requirements must be imposed upon the unruly creatures
with almost brutal distinctness—that is to say, magnified a thousand
times.Even the fulfilment of the requirement must be presented in the
coarsest way possible, so that it may command respect, as in the case
of the spiritualisation of the Brahmins.The struggle with the rabble
and the herd.If any degree of tameness and order has been reached,
the chasm separating thesepurifiedandregeneratedpeople from the
terribleremaindermust have been bridged....This chasm is a means of increasing self-respect in higher castes,
and of confirming their belief inthatwhich they represent—hence
theChandala.Contempt and its excess are perfectly correct
psychologically—that is to say, magnified a hundred times, so that it
may at least be felt.238.The struggle againstbrutalinstincts is quite different from
the struggle againstmorbidinstincts; it may even be a means
of overcoming brutality by making the brutesill.The psychical
treatment practised by Christianity is often nothing more than the
process of converting a brute into a sick andthereforetame animal.The struggle against raw and savage natures must be a struggle with
weapons which are able to affect such natures:superstitionsand such
means are therefore indispensable and essential.239.Our age, in a certain sense, ismature(that is to say, decadent),
just as Buddha's was.... That is why a sort of Christianity is possible
without all the absurd dogmas (the most repulsive offshoots of ancient
hybridism).240.Supposing it were impossible to disprove Christianity, Pascal thinks,
in view of theterriblepossibility that it may be true, that it is
in the highest degree prudent to be a Christian. As a proof of how
much Christianity has lost of its terrible nature, to-day we find that
other attempt to justify it, which consists in asserting, that even if
it were a mistake, it nevertheless provides the greatest advantages
and pleasures for its adherents throughout their lives:—it therefore
seems that this belief should be upheld owing to the peace and quiet
it ensures—not owing to the terror of a threatening possibility, but
rather out of fear of a life that has lost its charm. This hedonistic
turn of thought, which uses happiness as a proof, is a symptom of
decline: it takes the place of the proof resulting from power or from
that which to the Christian mind is most terrible—namely,fear.With
this new interpretation, Christianity is, as a matter of fact, nearing
its stage of exhaustion. People are satisfied with a Christianity which
is anopiate,because they no longer have the strength to seek, to
struggle, to dare, to stand alone, nor to take up Pascal's position and
to share that gloomily brooding self-contempt, that belief in human
unworthiness, and that anxiety which believes that it "may be damned."
But a Christianity the chief object of which is to soothe diseased
nerves, doesnot requirethe terrible solution consisting of a "God
on the cross"; thatis why Buddhism is secretly gaining ground all
over Europe.241.The humour of European culture: people regard one thing as true, but dothe other.For instance, what is the use of all the art of reading
and criticising, if the ecclesiastical interpretation of the Bible,
whether according to Catholics or Protestants, is still upheld!242.No one is sufficiently aware of the barbarity of the notions among
which we Europeans still live. To think that men have been able to
believe that the "Salvation of the soul" depended upon a book!... And I
am told that this is still believed.What is the good of all scientific education, all criticism and all
hermeneutics, if such nonsense as the Church's interpretation of the
Bible has not yet turned the colours of our bodies permanently into the
red of shame?243.Subject for reflection: To what extent does the fatal belief in
"Divine Providence"—the mostparalysingbelief for both the hand
and the understanding that has ever existed—continue to prevail;
to what extent have the Christian hypothesis and interpretation of
Life continued their livesunder the cover of terms like "Nature,"
"Progress," "perfectionment," "Darwinism," or beneath the superstition
that there is a certain relation between happiness and virtue,
unhappiness and sin? That absurdbeliefin the course of things, in
"Life" and in the "instinct of Life"; that foolishresignationwhich
arises from the notion that if only every one did his dutyallwould
go well—all this sort of thing can only have a meaning if one assumes
that there is a direction of thingssub specie boni.Evenfatalism,our present form of philosophical sensibility, is the result of alongbelief in Divine Providence, an unconscious result: as though it
were nothing to do with us how everything goes! (As though wemightlet things take their own course; the individual being only amodusof the absolute reality.)244.It is the height of psychological falsity on the part of man to imagine
a being according to his own petty standard, who is a beginning, a
"thing-in-itself," and who appears to him good, wise, mighty, and
precious; for thus he suppresses in thoughtsall the causalityby means of which every kind of goodness, wisdom, and power comes
into existence and has value. In short, elements of the most recent
and most conditional origin were regarded not as evolved, but as
spontaneously generated and "things-in-themselves," and perhaps as
the cause of all things.... Experience teaches us that, in every
case in which a man haselevated himself to any great extent
above the average of his fellows, every high degree ofpoweralways
involves a corresponding degree offreedomfrom Good and Evil as also
from "true" and "false," and cannot take into account what goodness
dictates: the same holds good of a high degree of wisdom—in this case
goodness is just as much suppressed as truthfulness, justice, virtue,
and other popular whims in valuations. In fact, is it not obvious that
every high degree of goodness itself presupposes a certain intellectual
myopia and obtuseness? as also an inability to distinguish at a great
distance between true and false, useful and harmful?—not to mention
the fact that a high degree of power in the hands of the highest
goodness might lead to the most baleful consequences ("the suppression
of evil"). In sooth it is enough to perceive with what aspirations the
"God of Love" inspires His believers: they ruin mankind for the benefit
of "good men." In practice, this same God has shown Himself to be a God
of the mostacute myopia, devilry, andimpotence, in the face of
the actual arrangement of the universe, and from this the value of His
conception may be estimated.

Knowledge and wisdom can have no value in themselves, any more than
goodness can: the goal they are striving after must be known first, for
then only can their value or worthlessness be judged—a goal might beimagined which would make excessive wisdom a great disadvantage (if,
for instance, complete deception were a prerequisite to the enhancement
of life; likewise, if goodnesswere able to paralyse and
depress the main springs of the great passions)....Taking our human life as it is, it cannot be denied that all "truth,"
"goodness," "holiness," and "Godliness" in the Christian sense, have
hitherto shown themselves to be great dangers—even now mankind is in
danger of perishing owing to an ideal which is hostile to life.245.Let any one think of thelosswhich all human institutions suffer,
when a divine and transcendental,higher sphereis postulated which
must first sanction these institutions! By recognising their worth
in this sanction alone (as in the case of marriage, for instance)their natural dignity is reduced, and under certain circumstancesdenied.... Nature is spitefully misjudged in the same ratio as the
anti-natural notion of a God is held in honour. "Nature" then comes to
mean no more than "contemptible," "bad." ...The fatal nature of a belief in God as thereality of the highest
moral qualities: through it, all real values were denied and
systematically regarded asvalueless. ThusAnti-Natureascended
the throne. With relentless logic the last step was reached, and this
was the absolute demand todeny Nature.246.By pressing the doctrine of disinterestedness and love into the
foreground, Christianity by nomeans elevated the interests
of the species above those of the individual. Its realhistoricaleffect, its fatal effect, remains precisely theincrease of egotism,of individual egotism, to excess (to the extreme which consists in
the belief in individual immortality). The individual was made so
important and so absolute, by means of Christian values, that he could
no longer besacrificed,despite the fact that the species can
only be maintained by human sacrifices. All "souls" becameequalbefore God: but this is the most pernicious of all valuations! If
one regards individuals as equals, the demands of the species are
ignored, and a process is initiated which ultimately leads to its
ruin. Christianity is thereverse of theprinciple ofselection.If the degenerate and sick man ("the Christian") is to be of the same
value as the healthy man ("the pagan"), or if he is even to be valued
higher than the latter, as Pascal's view of health and sickness would
have us value him, the natural course of evolution is thwarted and theunnaturalbecomes law.... In practice this general love of mankind
is nothing more than deliberately favouring all the suffering, the
botched, and the degenerate: it is this love that has reduced and
weakened the power, responsibility, and lofty duty of sacrificing
men. According to the scheme of Christian values, all that remained
was the alternative of self-sacrifice, but thisvestigeof human
sacrifice, which Christianity conceded and even recommended, has no
meaning when regarded in the light of rearing a whole species. The
prosperity of the species is by no means affected bythe sacrifice of
one individual (whether in the monastic and ascetic manner, or by means
of crosses, stakes, and scaffolds, as the "martyrs" of error). What the
species requires is the suppression of the physiologically botched,
the weak and the degenerate: but it was precisely to these people that
Christianity appealed as apreservativeforce, it simply strengthened
that natural and very strong instinct of all the weak which bids them
protect, maintain, and mutually support each other. What is Christian
"virtue" and "love of men," if not precisely this mutual assistance
with a view to survival, this solidarity of the weak, this thwarting of
selection? What is Christian altruism, if it is not the mob-egotism of
the weak which divines that, if everybody looks after everybody else,
every individual will be preserved for a longer period of time?... He
who does not consider this attitude of mind asimmoral,as a crime
against life, himself belongs to the sickly crowd, and also shares
their instincts.... Genuine love of mankind exacts sacrifice for
the good of the species—it is hard, full of self-control, because
it needs human sacrifices. And this pseudo-humanity which is called
Christianity, would fain establish the rule that nobody should be
sacrificed.247.Nothing could be more useful and deserves more promotion than
systematicNihilism in action.—As I understand the phenomena of
Christianity and pessimism, this is what they say: "Weare ripe for
nonentity, for us it is reasonable not to be." This hint from "reason"
in this case, is simply the voice ofselective Nature.On the other hand, what deserves the most rigorous condemnation, is
the ambiguous and cowardly infirmity of purpose of a religion likeChristianity,—or rather like theChurch,—which, instead of
recommending death and self-destruction, actually protects all the
botched and bungled, and encourages them to propagate their kind.Problem: with what kind of means could one lead up to a severe form of
really contagious Nihilism—a Nihilism which would teach and practise
voluntary death with scientific conscientiousness (and not the feeble
continuation of a vegetative sort of life with false hopes of a life
after death)?Christianity cannot be sufficiently condemned for having depreciated
thevalueof a greatcleansingNihilistic movement (like the one
which was probably in the process of formation), by its teaching of
the immortality of the private individual, as also by the hopes of
resurrection which it held out: that is to say, by dissuading people
from performing thedeed of Nihilismwhich is suicide.... In the
latter's place it puts lingering suicide, and gradually a puny, meagre,
but durable life; gradually a perfectly ordinary, bourgeois, mediocre
life, etc.248.Christian moral quackery.—Pity and contempt succeed each other at
short intervals, and at the sight of them I feel as indignant as if I
were inthe presence of the most despicable crime. Here error is made
a duty—a virtue, misapprehension has become a knack, the destructive
instinct is systematised under the name of "redemption"; here every
operation becomes a wound, an amputation of those very organs whose
energy would be the prerequisite to a return of health. And in the
best of cases no cure is effected; all that is done is to exchange one
set of evil symptoms for another set.... And this pernicious nonsense,
this systematised profanation and castration of life, passes for
holy and sacred; to be in its service, to be an instrument of this
art of healing—that is to say, to be a priest, is to be rendered
distinguished, reverent, holy, and sacred. God alone could have been
the Author of this supreme art of healing; redemption is only possible
as a revelation, as an act of grace, as an unearned gift, made by the
Creator Himself.Proposition I.: Spiritual healthiness is regarded as morbid, and
creates suspicion....Proposition II.: The prerequisites of a strong, exuberant life—strong
desires and passions—are reckoned as objections against strong and
exuberant life.Proposition III.: Everything which threatens danger to man, and which
can overcome and ruin him, is evil—and should be torn root and branch
from his soul.Proposition IV.: Man converted into a weak creature, inoffensive to
himself and others, crushed by humility and modesty, and conscious of
his weakness,—in fact, the "sinner,"—this is thedesirable type, and
one which one canproduceby means of a little spiritual surgery....249.What is it I protest against? That people should regard this paltry and
peaceful mediocrity, this spiritual equilibrium which knows nothing
of the fine impulses of great accumulations of strength, as something
high, or possibly as the standard of all things.Bacon of Verulamsays:Infimarum virtutum apud vulgus laus est,
mediarum admiratio, supremarum sensus nullus.Christianity as a
religion, however, belongs to thevulgus: it has no feeling for the
highest kind ofvirtus.250.Let us see what the "genuine Christian" does of all the things which
his instincts forbid him to do:—he covers beauty, pride, riches,
self-reliance, brilliancy, knowledge, and power with suspicion andmud—in short,all culture: his object is to deprive the latter of
itsclean conscience.251.The attacks made upon Christianity, hitherto, have been not only timid
but false. So long as Christian morality was not felt to be acapital
crime against Life,itsapologists had a good time. The question
concerning the mere "truth" of Christianity—whether in regard to the
existence of its God, or to the legendary history of its origin, not to
speak of its astronomy and natural science—is quite beside the point
so long as no inquiry is made into the value of Christianmorality.Are Christian moralsworth anything,or are they a profanation and an
outrage, despite all the arts of holiness and seduction with which they
are enforced? The question concerning the truth of the religion may be
met by all sorts of subterfuges; and the most fervent believers can,
in the end, avail themselves of the logic used by their opponents, in
order to create a right for their side to assert that certain things
are irrefutable—that is to say, theytranscendthe means employed
to refute them (nowadays this trick of dialectics is called "Kantian
Criticism").252.Christianity should never be forgiven for having ruined such men as
Pascal. This is precisely what should be combated in Christianity,
namely, that it has the will to break the spirit of the strongest
and noblest natures. One should take no rest until this thing is
utterly destroyed:—the ideal of mankind which Christianity advances,
the demands it makes upon men, and its "Nay" and "Yea" relative to
humanity. The whole of the remaining absurdities, that is to say,
Christian fable, Christian cobweb-spinning in ideas and principles,
and Christian theology, do not concern us; they might be a thousand
times more absurdand we should not raise a finger to destroy them.
But what we do stand up against, is that ideal which, thanks to its
morbid beauty and feminine seductiveness, thanks to its insidious and
slanderous eloquence, appeals to all the cowardices and vanities of
wearied souls,—and the strongest have their moments of fatigue,—as
though all that which seems most useful and desirable at such
moments—that is to say, confidence, artlessness, modesty, patience,
love of one's like, resignation, submission to God, and a sort of
self-surrender—were useful and desirableper se; as though the puny,
modest abortion which in these creatures takes the place of a soul,
this virtuous, mediocre animal and sheep of the flock—which deigns to
call itself man, were not only to take precedence of the stronger, more
evil, more passionate, more defiant, and more prodigal type of man, who
by virtue of these very qualities is exposed to a hundred times more
dangers than the former, but were actually to stand as an ideal for man
in general, as a goal, a measure—the highest desideratum. The creation
ofthisideal was the most appalling temptation that had ever
been put in the way of mankind; for, with it, the stronger and more
successful exceptions, the lucky cases among men, in which the will
to power and to growth leads the whole species "man" one step farther
forward, this type was threatened with disaster. By means of the values
of this ideal, the growth of such higher men would be checked at the
root. For these men, owing to their superior demands and duties,
readily accept amore dangerous life (speaking economically, it is a
case of an increase in the costs of the undertaking coinciding with
a greater chance of failure). What is it we combat in Christianity?
That it aims at destroying the strong, at breaking their spirit, at
exploiting their moments of weariness and debility, at converting
their proud assurance into anxiety and conscience-trouble; that it
knows how to poison the noblest instincts and to infect them with
disease, until their strength, their will to power, turns inwards,
against themselves—until the strong perish through their excessive
self-contempt and self-immolation: that gruesome way of perishing, of
whichPascalis the most famous example.II.A CRITICISM OF MORALITY.1. The Origin of Moral Valuations.253.This is an attempt at investigating morality without being affected by
its charm, and not without some mistrust in regard to the beguiling
beauty of its attitudes and looks. A world which we can admire, which
is in keeping with our capacity for worship—which is continuallydemonstratingitself—in small things or in large: this is the
Christian standpoint which is common to us all.But owing to an increase in our astuteness, in our mistrust, and in our
scientific spirit (also through a more developed instinct for truth,
which again is due to Christian influence), this interpretation has
grown ever less and less tenable for us.The craftiest of subterfuges: Kantian criticism. The intellect not
only denies itself every right to interpret things in that way, but
also to reject the interpretation once it has been made. People are
satisfied with agreaterdemand upon their credulity and faith, with
a renunciation of allright to reason concerning the proof of their
creed, with an intangible and superior "Ideal" (God) as a stop-gap.The Hegelian subterfuge, a continuation of the Platonic, a piece
of romanticism and reaction, and at the same time a symptom of
the historical sense of a newpower: "Spirit" itself is the
"self-revealing and self-realising ideal": we believe that in the
"process of, development" an ever greater proportion of this ideal is
being manifested—thus the ideal is being realised, faith is vested in
thefutureinto which all its noble needs are projected and in which
they are being worshipped.In short:—(1) God is unknowable to us and not to be demonstrated by us (the
concealed meaning behind the whole of the epistemological movement);(2) God may be demonstrated, but as something evolving, and we are
part of it, as our pressing desire for an ideal proves (the concealed
meaning behind the historical movement).It should be observed that criticism isneverlevelled at the ideal
itself, but only at the problem which gives rise to a controversy
concerning the ideal—that is to say, why it has not yet been realised,
or why it is not demonstrable in small things as in great.***It makes all the difference: whether a man recognises this state of
distress as such owing toa passion or to a yearning in himself, or
whether it comes home to him as a problem which he arrives at only by
straining his thinking powers and his historical imagination to the
utmost.Away from the religious and philosophical points of view we find the
same phenomena. Utilitarianism (socialism and democracy) criticises
the origin of moral valuations, though it believes in them just as
much as the Christian does. (What guilelessness! As if morality could
remain when the sanctioningdeityis no longer present! The belief in
a "Beyond" is absolutely necessary, if the faith in morality is to be
maintained.)Fundamental problem: whence comes this almighty power ofFaith?
Whence this faith in morality?(It is betrayed by the fact that even
the fundamental conditions of life are falsely interpreted in favour of
it: despite our knowledge of plants and animals. "Self-preservation":
the Darwinian prospect of a reconciliation of the altruistic and
egotistic principles.)254.An inquiry into theorigin of our moral valuationsand tables of
law has absolutely nothing to do with thecriticismof them, though
people persist in believing it has; the two matters lie quite apart,
notwithstanding the fact that the knowledge of thepudenda origoof a valuation does diminish its prestige, and prepares the way to a
critical attitude and spirit towards it.What is the actual worth of our valuations and tables of moral laws?What is the outcome of their dominion?For whom? In relation to
what?—answer: for Life. Butwhat is Life?A new and more definite
concept of what "Life" is, becomes necessary here. My formula of this
concept is: Life is Will to Power.What is the meaning of the very act of valuing?Does it point back to
another, metaphysical world, or does it point down? (As Kant believed,
who lived in a period whichprecededthe great historical movement.)
In short:what is its origin?Or had it no human "origin"?—Answer:
moral valuations are a sort of explanation, they constitute a method
of interpreting. Interpretation in itself is a symptom of definite
physiological conditions, as also of a definite spiritual level of
ruling judgments.What is it that interprets?—Our passions.255.All virtues should be looked upon as physiologicalconditions: the
principal organic functions, more particularly, should be considered
necessary and good. All virtues are really refinedpassionsand
elevated physiological conditions.Pity and philanthropy may be regarded as the developments of
sexual relations,—justice as the development of the passion for
revenge,—virtue as the love of resistance, the will to power,—honour
as an acknowledgment of an equal, or of an equally powerful, force.256.Under "Morality" I understand a system of valuations which is in
relation with the conditions of a creature's life.257.Formerly it was said of every form of morality, "Ye shall know them by
their fruits." I say of every form of morality: "It is a fruit, and
from it I learn theSoilout of which it grew."258.I have tried to understand all moral judgments as symptoms and a
language of signs in which the processes of physiological prosperity
or the reverse, as also the consciousness of the conditions of
preservation and growth, are betrayed—a mode of interpretation equal
in worth to astrology, prejudices, created by instincts (peculiar
to races, communities, and different stages of existence, as, for
instance, youth or decay, etc.).