Applying this principle to the morality of Christian Europe more
particularly, we find that our moral values are signs of decline, of a
disbelief inLife,and of a preparation for pessimism.My leading doctrine is this:there are no moral phenomena, but only a
moral interpretation of phenomena. The origin of this interpretation
itself lies beyond the pale of morality.What is the meaning of the fact that we haveimagined acontradictionin existence? This is of paramount importance: behind
all other valuations those moral valuations stand commandingly.
Supposing they disappear, according to what standard shall we then
measure? And then of what value would knowledge be, etc. etc.???259.A point of view: in all valuations there is a definite purpose:
thepreservationof an individual, a community, a race, a state,
a church, a belief, or a culture.—Thanks to the fact that peopleforgetthat all valuing has a purpose, one and the same man may swarm
with a host of contradictory valuations, andtherefore with a host of
contradictory impulses.This is theexpression of disease in manas
opposed to the health of animals, in which all the instincts answer
certain definite purposes.This creature full of contradictions, however, has in his being a grand
method of acquiring knowledge: he feels the pros and cons, he elevates
himselfto Justice—that is to say, to the ascertaining of principlesbeyond the valuations good and evil.The wisest man would thus be therichest in contradictions,he would
also be gifted with mental antennæ wherewith he could understand all
kinds of men; and with it all he would have his great moments, when all
the chords in his being would ring insplendid unison—the rarest ofaccidentseven in us! A sort of planetary movement.260."To will" is to will an object. But "object," as an idea, involves
a valuation. Whence do valuations originate? Is a permanent norm,
"pleasant or painful," their basis?But in an incalculable number of cases we first of allmakea thing
painful, by investing it with a valuation.The compass of moral valuations: they play a part in almost every
mental impression. To us the world iscolouredby them.We have imagined the purpose and value of all things: owing to this
we possess an enormous fund oflatent power,but the study ofcomparativevalues teaches us that values which were actually opposed
to each other have been held in high esteem, and that there have beenmanytables of laws (they could not, therefore, have been worth
anythingper se).The analysis of individual tables of laws revealed the fact that they
were framed (often very badly) as theconditions of existencefor
limited groups of people, to ensure their maintenance.Upon examining modern men, we found that there are a large number
ofvery differentvalues to hand, and that they no longer contain
any creative power—the fundamental principle: "the condition of
existence" is now quite divorced from the moral values. It is much
more superfluous and not nearly so painful. It becomes anarbitrarymatter. Chaos.Who createsthe goalwhich stands above mankindkind and above the
individual? Formerly morality was apreservativemeasure: but nobody
wants topreserveany longer, there is nothing to preserve. Thus we
are reduced to anexperimental morality,each mustpostulatea goal
for himself.261.What is thecriterionof a moral action? (1) Its disinterestedness,
(2) its universal acceptation, etc. But this is parlour-morality. Races
must be studied and observed, and, in each case, the criterion must be
discovered, as also the thing it expresses: a belief such as: "This
particular attitude or behaviour belongs to the principal condition of
our existence." Immoral means "that which brings about ruin." Now all
societies in which these principles were discovered have met with their
ruin: a few of these principles have been used and used again, because
every newly established community required them; this was the case, for
instance, with "Thou shalt not steal." In ages when people could not be
expected to show any marked social instinct (as, for instance, in the
age of the Roman Empire) the latter was, religiously speaking, directed
towards the idea of "spiritual salvation," or, in philosophical
parlance, towards "the greatest happiness." For even the philosophers
of Greece did not feel any more for their πολις.262.The necessity of false values.—A judgment may be refuted when it is
shown that it wasconditioned: but the necessity of retaining it is
not thereby cancelled. Reasons can no more eradicate false values than
they can alter astigmatism in a man's eyes.The need of theirexistencemust be understood: they are theresultof causes which have nothing to do with reasoning.263.Toseeandrevealthe problem of morality seems to me to be the new
task and the principal thing of all. I deny that this has been done by
moral philosophies heretofore.264.How false and deceptive men have always been concerning the fundamental
facts of their inner world! Here to have no eye; here to hold one's
tongue, and here to open one's mouth.265.There seems to be no knowledge or consciousness of the manyrevolutionsthat have taken place in moral judgments, and of
the number of times that "evil" has really and seriously been
christened "good" andvice versa.I myself pointed to one of these
transformations with the words "Sittlichkeit der Sitte."[3]Even
consciencehas changed its sphere: formerly there was such a thing as
a gregarious pang of conscience.[3]The morality of custom.266.A.Moralityas the work ofImmorality.1. In order that moral values may attain tosupremacy,a host of
immoral forces and passions must assist them.2. The establishment of moral values is the work of immoral passions
and considerations.B.Morality as the work of error.C.Morality gradually contradicts itself.Requital—Truthfulness,
Doubt, έποχή, Judging. The "Immorality" ofbeliefin morality.The steps:—1. Absolute dominion of morality: all biological phenomena measured andjudgedaccording to its values.2. The attempt to identify Life with morality (symptom of awakened
scepticism: morality must no longer be regarded as the opposite of
Life); many means are sought—even a transcendental one.3. Theopposition of LifeandMorality.Morality condemned and
sentenced by Life.D. To what extent was moralitydangerousto Life?(a)It depreciated the joy of living and the gratitude felt towards
Life, etc.(b)It checked the tendency to beautify and to ennoble Life.(c)It checked the knowledge of Life.(d)It checked the unfolding of Life, because it tried to set the
highest phenomena thereof at variance with itself.E. Contra-account: theusefulnessof morality to Life.(1) Morality may be a preservative measure for the general whole, it
may be a process of uniting dispersed members: it is useful as an agent
in the production of the man who is a "tool."(2) Morality may be a preservative measure mitigating the inner danger
threatening man from the direction of his passions: it is useful to
"mediocre people."(3) Morality may be a preservative measure resisting the life-poisoning
influences of profound sorrow and bitterness: it is useful to the
"sufferers."(4) Morality may be a preservative measure opposed to the terrible
outbursts of the mighty: it is useful to the "lowly."267.It is an excellent thing when one can use the expressions "right" and
"wrong" in a definite, narrow, and "bourgeois" sense, as for instance
in the sentence: "Do right and fear no one";[4]—that is to say, todo one's duty, according to the rough scheme of life within the limit
of which a community exists.—Let us not think meanly of what a few
thousand years of morality have inculcated upon our minds.[4]"Thue Recht und scheue Niemand."268.Two types of morality must not be confounded: the morality with which
the instinct that has remained healthy defends itself from incipient
decadence, and the other morality by means of which this decadence
asserts itself, justifies itself, and leads downwards.The first-named is usually stoical, hard, tyrannical(Stoicismitself
was an example of the sort of "drag-chain" morality we speak of); the
other is gushing, sentimental, full of secrets, it has the women and
"beautiful feelings" on its side (Primitive Christianity was an example
of this morality).269.I shall try to regard all moralising, with one glance, as a
phenomenon—also as ariddle.Moral phenomena have preoccupied me
like riddles. To-day I should be able to give a reply to the question:
whyshouldmy neighbour's welfare be of greater value to me than
my own? and why is it that my neighbour himselfshouldvalue his
welfare differently from the way in whichI value it—that is to say,
why should preciselymywelfare be paramount in his mind? What is
the meaning of this "Thou shalt," which is regarded as "given" even by
philosophers themselves?The seemingly insane idea that a man should esteem the act he performs
for a fellow-creature, higher than the one he performs for himself,
and that the same fellow-creature should do so too (that only those
acts should be held to be good which are performed with an eye to
the neighbour and for his welfare) has its reasons—namely, as the
result of the social instinct which rests upon the valuation, that
single individuals are of little importance although collectively
their importance is very great. This, of course, presupposes that they
constitute acommunitywith one feeling and one conscience pervading
the whole. It is therefore a sort of exercise for keeping one's eyes in
a certain direction; it is the will to a kind of optics which renders a
view of one's self impossible.My idea: goals are wanting, andthese must be individuals.We see the
general drift: every individual gets sacrificed and serves as a tool.
Let any one keep his eyes open in the streets—is not every one he sees
a slave? Whither? What is the purpose of it all?270.How is it possible that a man can respect himselfonlyin regard
to moral values, that hesubordinates and despises everything in
favour of good, evil, improvement, spiritual salvation, etc.? as,
for instance, Henri Fréd. Amiel. What is the meaning of themoral
idiosyncrasy?—I mean this both in the psychological and physiological
sense, as it was, for instance, in Pascal. In cases, then, in whichothergreat qualities are not wanting; and even in the case of
Schopenhauer, who obviously valued what he did not andcouldnot have
...—is it not the result of a merely mechanicalmoral interpretationof real states of pain and displeasure? is it not a particular form
ofsensibilitywhich doesnothappen tounderstandthe cause
of its many unpleasurable feelings, butthinks to explain them with
moral hypotheses?In this way an occasional feeling of well-being andstrengthalways appears under the optics of a "clean conscience,"
flooded with light through the proximity of God and the consciousness
of salvation.... Thus themoral idiosyncratisthas (1)eitheracquired his real worth in approximating to the virtuous type of
society: "the good fellow," "the upright man"—a sort of medium
state of high respectability:mediocrein all his abilities,
but honest, conscientious, firm, respected, and tried, in all his
aspirations; (2)or,he imagines he has acquired that worth, simply
because he cannot otherwise understand all his states—he is unknown to
himself; he therefore interprets himself in this fashion.—Morality is
the onlyscheme of interpretationby means of which this type of man
can tolerate himself:—is it a form of vanity?271.The predominance of moral values.—The consequence of this
predominance: the corruption of psychology, etc.; the fatality which
is associated with it everywhere. What is themeaningof this
predominance? What does it point to?To a certaingreater urgencyof saying nay or yea definitely in
this domain. All sorts ofimperativeshave been used in order to
make moral values appear as if they were for ever fixed:—they have
been enjoined for the longest period of time: they almost appear
to be instinctive, like inner commands. They are the expression ofsociety's preservative measures,for they are felt to be almostbeyond question.The practice—that is to say, theutilityof being
agreed concerning superior values, has attained in this respect to
a sort of sanction. We observe that every care is taken to paralyse
reflection and criticism in this department—look at Kant's attitude!
not to speak of those who believe that it is immoral even to prosecute
"research" in these matters.272.My desireis to show the absolute homogeneity of all phenomena, and
to ascribe to moral differentiations but the value ofperspective; to
show that all that which is praised as moral is essentially the same
as that which is immoral, and was onlymade possible, according to
the law of all moral development—that is to say, by means of immoral
artifices and with a view to immoral ends—just as all that which
has been decried as immoral is, from the standpoint of economics,
both superior and essential; and how development leading to a greater
abundance of life necessarily Involvesprogressin the realmof
immorality. "Truth," that is the extent to which weallowourselves
to comprehendthisfact.273.But do not let us fear: as a matter of fact, we require a great deal of
morality, in order to be immoral in this subtle way; let me speak in a
parable:—A physiologist interested in a certain illness, and an invalid who
wishes to be cured of that same illness, have not the same interests.
Let us suppose that the illness happens to be morality,—for morality
is an illness,—and that we Europeans are the invalid: what an amount
of subtle torment and difficulty would arise supposing we Europeans
were, at once, our own inquisitive spectators and the physiologist
above-mentioned! Should we under these circumstances earnestly desire
to rid ourselves of morality? Should we want to? This is of course
irrespective of the question whether we should beableto do
so—whether we can becuredat all?2. The Herd.274.Whose will to power is morality?—Thecommon factorof all European
history since the time ofSocratesis the attempt to make themoral
valuesdominate all other values, in order that they should not be
only the leader and judge of life, but also: (1) knowledge, (2) Art,
(3) political and social aspirations. "Amelioration" regarded as the
only duty, everything else used as ameansthereto (or as a force
distributing, hindering, and endangering its realisation, and therefore
to be opposed and annihilated ...).—A similar movement to be observedin ChinaandIndia.What is the meaning of thiswill to power on the part of moral
values,which has played such a part in the world's prodigious
evolutions?Answer:—Three powers lie concealed behind it; (1) The instinct
of theherdopposed to the strong and the independent; (2) the
instinct of allsufferersand allabortionsopposed to the happy
and well-constituted; (3) the instinct of the mediocre opposed to
the exceptions.—Enormous advantage of this movement,despite the
cruelty, falseness, and narrow-mindedness which has helped it along
(for the history of thestruggle of morality with the fundamental
instincts of lifeis in itself the greatest piece of immorality that
has ever yet been witnessed on earth ...).275.The fewest succeed in discovering a problem behind all that which
constitutes our daily life, and to which we have become accustomed
throughout the ages—our eye does not seem focussed for such things:
at least, this seems to me to be the case in so far as our morality is
concerned."Every man should be the preoccupation of his fellows"; he who thinks
in this way deserves honour: no one ought to think of himself."Thou shalt": an impulse which, like the sexual impulse, cannot fathom
itself, is set apart and is not condemned as all the other instincts
are—on the contrary, it is made to be their standard and their judge!The problem of "equality," in the face of the fact that we all thirst
for distinction: here, on the contrary, we should demand of ourselves
what we demand of others. That is so tasteless and obviously insane;
but—it is felt to be holy and of a higher order. The fact that it is
opposed to common sense is not even noticed.Self-sacrifice and self-abnegation are considered distinguishing, as
are also the attempt to obey morality implicitly, and the belief that
one should be every one's equal in its presence.The neglect and the surrender of Life and of well-being is held to be
distinguished, as are also the complete renunciation of individual
valuations and the severe exaction from every one of the same
sacrifice. "The value of an action is onceand for allfixed: every
individual must submit to this valuation."We see: an authority speaks—who speaks?—We must condone it in human
pride, if man tried to make this authority as high as possible, for
he wanted to feel as humble as he possibly could by the side of it.
Thus—God speaks!God was necessary as an unconditional sanction which has no superior,
as a "Categorical Imperator": or, in so far as people believed in the
authority of reason, what was needed was a "unitarian metaphysics" by
means of which this view could be made logical.Now, admitting that faith in God is dead: the question arises once
more: "who speaks?" My answer, which I take from biology and not from
metaphysics, is: "thegregarious instinct speaks." This is what
desires to be master: hence its "thou shalt!"—it will allow the
individual to exist only as a part of a whole, only in favour of the
whole, it hates those who detach themselves from everything—it turns
the hatred of all individuals against him.276.The whole of the morality of Europe is based upon the valueswhich
are useful to the herd: the sorrow of all higher and exceptional men
is explained by the fact that everything which distinguishes them from
others reaches their consciousness in the form of a feeling of their
own smallness and egregiousness. It is thevirtuesof modern men
which are the causes of pessimisticgloominess; the mediocre, like the
herd, are not troubled much with questions or with conscience—they
are cheerful. (Among the gloomy strong men, Pascal and Schopenhauer are
noted examples.)The more dangerous a quality seems to the herd, the more completely it
is condemned.277.The morality oftruthfulnessin the herd. "Thou shalt be
recognisable, thou shalt express thy inner nature by means of clear
and constant signs—otherwise thou art dangerous: and supposing
thou art evil, thy power of dissimulation is absolutely the worst
thing for the herd. We despise the secretive and those whom we
cannot identify.—Consequentlythou must regard thyself as
recognisable, thou mayest not remainconcealedfrom thyself, thou
mayest not even believe in the possibility of thy everchanging."
Thus, the insistence upon truthfulness has as its main object therecognisabilityand thestabilityof the individual. As a matter
of fact, it is the object of education to make each gregarious
unit believe in a certaindefinite dogmaconcerning the nature
of man: educationfirst creates this dogmaand thereupon exacts
"truthfulness."278.Within the confines of a herd or of a community—that is to say,inter
pares,theover-estimationof truthfulness is very reasonable. A
manmust not allow himself to be deceived—andconsequentlyhe
adopts as his own personal morality that he should deceive no one!—a
sort of mutual obligation among equals! In his dealings with the
outside world caution and danger demand that he shouldbe on his guard
against deception: the first psychological condition of this attitude
would mean that he is also on his guard againsthis own people.Mistrust thus appears as the source of truthfulness.279.A criticism of the virtues of the herd.—Inertia is active: (1)
In confidence, because mistrust makes suspense, reflection, and
observation necessary. (2) In veneration, where the gulf that
separates power is great and submission necessary: then, so that
fear may cease to exist, everybody tries to love and esteem, while
the difference in power is interpreted as a difference of value:
and thus the relationship to the powerfulno longer has anything
revolting in it.(3) In the sense of truth. What is truth? Truth
is that explanation of things which causes us the smallest amount
of mental exertion (apart from this, lying is extremely fatiguing).
(4) In sympathy. It is a relief to know one's self on the same level
with all, to feel as all feel, and toaccepta belief which is
already current; it is something passive beside the activity which
appropriates and continually carries into practice the most individual
rights of valuation (the latter process allows of no repose). (5) Inimpartiality and coolness of judgment: people scout the strain of being
moved, and prefer to be detached and "objective." (6) In uprightness:
people prefer to obey a law which is to hand rather than tocreatea new one, rather than to command themselves and others: the fear of
commanding—it is better to submit than to rebel. (7) In toleration:
the fear of exercising a right or of enforcing a judgment.280.The instinct of the herd values thejuste milieuand theaverageas the highest and most precious of all things: the spot where the
majority is to be found, and the air that it breathes there. In this
way it is the opponent of all order of rank; it regards a climb from
the level to the heights in the same light as a descent from the
majority to the minority. The herd regards theexception,whether
it be above or beneath its general level, as something which is
antagonistic and dangerous to itself. Their trick in dealing with
the exceptions above them, the strong, the mighty, the wise, and the
fruitful, is to persuade them to become guardians, herdsmen, and
watchmen—in fact, to become theirhead-servants: thus they convert
a danger into a thing which is useful. In the middle, fear ceases:
here a man is alone with nothing; here there is not much room even for
misunderstandings; here there is equality; here a man's individual
existence is not felt as a reproach, but as therightexistence;
herecontentment reigns supreme. Mistrust is active only towards the
exceptions; to be an exception is to be a sinner.281.If, in compliance with our communal instincts, we make certain
regulations for, ourselves and forbid certain acts, we do not of
course, in common reason, forbid a certain kind of "existence," nor
a certain attitude of mind, but only a particular application and
development of this "existence" and "attitude of mind." But then the
idealist of virtue, themoralist,comes along and says: "God sees
into the human heart! What matters it that ye abstain from certain
acts: ye are not any better on that account!" Answer: Mr. Longears
and Virtue-Monger, we do not want to be better at all, we are quite
satisfied with ourselves, all we desire is that we should notharmone another—and that is why we forbid certain actions when they take
a particular direction—that is to say, when they are against our
own interests: but that does not alter the fact that when these same
actions are directed against the enemies of our community—against
you, for instance—we are at a loss to know how to pay them sufficient
honour. We educate our children up to them; we develop them to the
fullest extent. Did we share that "god-fearing" radicalism which your
holy craziness recommends, if we were green-horns enough to condemn
the source of those forbidden "acts" by condemning the "heart" and the
"attitude of mind" which recommends them,that would mean condemning
our very existence, and with it its greatest prerequisite—an attitude
of mind, a heart, a passion which we revere with all our soul. By
our decrees we prevent this attitude of mind from breaking out and
venting itself in a useless way—we are prudent when we prescribe
such laws for ourselves; we are alsomoralin so doing.... Have
you no idea—however vague—what sacrifices it has cost us, how much
self-control, self-subjection, and hardness it has compelled us to
exercise? We are vehement in our desires; there are times when we even
feel as if we could devour each other.... But the "communal spirit" is
master of us: have you observed that this is almost a definition of
morality?282.The weakness of the gregarious animalgives rise to a morality
which is precisely similar to that resulting from the weakness of the
decadent man: they understand each other; theyassociatewith each
other (the great decadent religions always rely upon the support of
the herd). The gregarious animal, as such, is free from all morbid
characteristics, it is in itself an invaluable creature; but it is
incapable of taking any initiative; it must have a "leader"—the
priests understand this.... The state is not subtle, not secret
enough; the art of "directing consciences" slips its grasp. How is the
gregarious animal infected with illness by the priest?283.The hatred directed against the privileged in body and spirit:
the revolt of the ugly and bungled souls against the beautiful, the
proud, and the cheerful. The weapons used: contempt of beauty, of
pride, of happiness: "There is no such thing as merit," "The danger is
enormous: it is right that oneshouldtremble and feel ill at ease,"
"Naturalness is evil; it is right to oppose all that is natural—even
'reason'" (all that is antinatural is elevated to the highest place).It is again thepriestswho exploit this condition, and who win the
"people" over to themselves. "The sinner" over whom there is more joy
in heaven than over "the just person." This is the struggle against
"paganism" (the pang of conscience, a measure for disturbing the
harmony of the soul).The hatred of the mediocrefor theexceptions,and of the herd for
its independent members. (Custom actually regarded as "morality.") The
revulsion of feelingagainst"egotism": that only is worth anything
which is done "for another." "We are all equal";—against the love of
dominion, against "dominion" in general;—against privilege;—against
sectarians, free-spirits, and sceptics;—against philosophy (a
force opposing mechanical and automatic instincts); in philosophers
themselves—"the categorical imperative," the essential nature of
morality, "general and universal."284.The qualities and tendencies which arepraised: peacefulness, equity,
moderation, modesty, reverence, respectfulness, bravery, chastity,
honesty, fidelity, credulity, rectitude, confidence, resignation,
pity, helpfulness, conscientiousness, simplicity, mildness, justice,
generosity, leniency, obedience, disinterestedness, freedom from envy,
good nature, industry.We must ascertain to what extentsuch qualitiesare conditioned
as means to the attainment of certain desires andends(often an
"evil" end); or as results of dominating passions (for instance,intellectuality): or as the expressions of certain states of
need—that is to say, aspreservative measures(as in the case of
citizens, slaves, women, etc.).In short, every one of them is notconsidered "good" for its own
sake,but rather because it approximates to a standard prescribed
either by "society" or by the "herd," as a means to the ends of the
latter, as necessary for their preservation and enhancement, and also
as the result of an actualgregarious instinctin the individual;
these qualities are thus in the service of an instinct which isfundamentally differentfrom thesestates of virtue.For the herd
isantagonistic, selfish, and pitilessto the outside world; it is
full of a love of dominion and of feelings of mistrust, etc.In the "herdsman" thisantagonismcomes to theforehe must have
qualities which arethe reverse ofthose possessed by the herd.The mortal enmity of the herd towards allorder of rank: its
instinct is in favour of theleveller(Christ). Towards allstrong
individuals (the sovereigns)it is hostile, unfair, intemperate,
arrogant, cheeky, disrespectful, cowardly, false, lying, pitiless,
deceitful, envious, revengeful.285.My teaching is this, that the herd seeks to maintain and preserve one
type of man, and that it defends itself on two sides—that is to say,
against those which are decadents from its ranks (criminals, etc.), and
against those who rise superior to its dead level. The instincts of the
herd tend to a stationary state of society; they merely preserve. They
have no creative power.The pleasant feelings of goodness and benevolence with which the just
man fills us (as opposed to the suspense and the fear to which the
great innovating man gives rise) are our own sensations of personal
security and equality: in this way the gregarious animal glorifies
the gregarious nature, and then begins to feel at ease. This judgment
on the part of the "comfortable" ones rigs itself out in the most
beautiful words—and thus "morality" is born. Let any one observe,
however, thehatred of the herdfor all truthful men.286.Let us not deceive ourselves! When a man hears the whisper of the moral
imperative in hisbreast, as altruism would have him hear it, he
shows thereby that he belongs to theherd.When a man is conscious
of the opposite feelings,—that is to say, when he sees his danger and
his undoing in disinterested and unselfish actions,—then he does not
belong to the herd.287.My philosophy aims at a neworder of rank: notat an individualistic
morality.[5]The spirit of the herd should rule within the herd—but
not beyond it: the leaders of the herd require a fundamentally
different valuation for their actions, as do also the independent ones
or the beasts of prey, etc.[5]TRANSLATOR'S NOTE—Here is a broad distinction between
Nietzsche and Herbert Spencer.3. General Observations Concerning Morality.288.Morality regarded as an attempt at establishing human pride.—The
"Free-Will" theory is anti-religious. Its ultimate object is to bestow
the right upon man to regard himself as thecauseof his highest
states and actions: it is a form of the growingfeeling of pride.Man feels his power his "happiness"; as they say: there must be a will
behind these states—otherwise they do not belong to him. Virtue is
an attempt at postulating a modicum of will, past or present, as the
necessary antecedent to every exalted and strong feeling of happiness:
if the will to certain actions is regularly present in consciousness,
a sensation of power may be interpreted as its result. This is amerely psychological point of view,based upon the false assumption
that nothing belongs to us which we have not consciously willed. The
whole of the teaching of responsibility relies upon the ingenuous
psychological rule that the will is the only cause, and that one must
have been aware of having willed in order to be able to regardone's
selfas a cause.Then comes the counter-movement—that of the moral-philosophers.
These men still labour under the delusion that a man is responsible
only for what he has willed. The value of man is then made amoral
value: thus morality becomes acausa prima; for this there must be
some kind of principle in man, and "free will" is posited asprima
causa.Thearrière penséeis always this: If man is not acausa
primathrough his will, he must be irresponsible,—therefore he
does not come within the jurisdiction of morals,—virtue or vice is
automatic and mechanical....In short: in order that man may respect himself he must be capable of
becoming evil.289.Theatricalnessregarded as the result of "Free Will" morality. It
is a step in thedevelopmentof the feeling of power itselfto
believe one's self to be the author of one's exalted moments (of one's
perfection) and to havewilledthem....(Criticism: all perfect action is precisely unconscious and not
deliberate; consciousness is often the expression of an imperfect
and often morbid constitution.Personal perfection regarded as
determined by will, as an act of consciousness,as reason with
dialectics, is a caricature, a sort of self-contradiction.... Any
degree of consciousness renders perfectionimpossible.... A form oftheatricalness.)290.Themoral hypothesis,designed with a view tojustifying God,said: evil must be voluntary (simply in order that thevoluntariness
of goodnessmight be believed in); and again, all evil and suffering
have anobject which is salvation.The notion "guilt" was considered as something which had no
connection at all with the ultimate cause of existence, and the
notion "punishment" was held to be an educating and beneficent act,
consequently an act proceeding from agoodGod.The absolute dominion of moral valuationsoverall others: nobody
doubted that God could not be evil and could do no harm—that is to
say, perfection was understood merely asmoralperfection.291.How false is the supposition that an action must depend upon what has
preceded it inconsciousness! And morality has been measured in the
light of this supposition, as also criminality....The value of an action must be judged by its results, say the
utilitarians: to measure it according to its origin involves the
impossibility ofknowingthat origin.But do we know its results? Five stages ahead, perhaps. Who can tell
what an action provokes and sets in motion? As a stimulus? As the spark
which fires a powder-magazine? Utilitarians are simpletons.... And
finally, they would first of all have to knowwhatis useful; here
also their sight can travel only over five stages or so.... They have
no notion of the great economy which cannot dispense with evil.We do not know the origin or the results: has an action, then, any
value?We have yet the action itself to consider: the states of consciousness
that accompany it, the yea or nay which follows upon its performance:
does the value of an action lie in the subjective states which
accompany it? (In that case, the value of music would be measured
according to the pleasure or displeasure which it occasions in us ...
which it gives to thecomposer....) Obviously feelings of value
must accompany it, a sensation of power, restraint, or impotence—for
instance, freedom or lightsomeness. Or, putting the question
differently: could the value of an action be reduced to physiological
terms? could it be the expression of completely free or constrained
life?—Maybe itsbiologicalvalue is expressed in this way....If, then, an action can be judged neither in the light of its origin,
nor its results, nor its accompaniments in consciousness, then its
value must bexunknown....292.It amounts to adenaturalisation of morality,toseparatean action
from a man; to direct hatred or contempt against "sin"; to believe that
there are actions which are good or bad in themselves.There-establishment of"Nature": an action in itself is quite
devoid of value; the whole question is this: who performed it? One and
the same "crime" may, in one case, be the greatest privilege, in the
other infamy. As a matter of fact, it is the selfishness of the judges
which interprets an action (in regard to its author) according as to
whether it was useful or harmful to themselves (or in relation to its
degree of likeness or unlikeness to them).293.The concept "reprehensible action" presents us with some difficulties.
Nothing in all that happens can be reprehensible in itself:one would
not dare to eliminate it completely; for everything is so bound up
with everything else, that to exclude one part would mean to exclude
the whole.A reprehensible action, therefore, would mean a reprehensible world as
a whole....And even then, in a reprehensible world even reprehending would be
reprehensible.... And the consequence of an attitude of mind thatcondemns everything, would be the affirmation of everything in
practice.... If Becoming is a huge ring, everything that forms a part
of it is of equal value, is eternal and necessary.—In all correlations
of yea and nay, of preference and rejection, love and hate, all that
is expressed is a certain point of view, peculiar to the interests of
a certain type of living organism: everything that lives saysyeaby
the very fact of its existence.294.Criticism of the subjective feelings of value.—Conscience. Formerly
people argued: conscience condemns this action, therefore this action
is reprehensible. But, as a matter of fact, conscience condemns an
action because that action has been condemned for a long period of
time: all conscience does is to imitate. It does not create values.
That which first led to the condemnation of certain actions, wasnotconscience: but the knowledge of (or the prejudice against)
its consequences.... The approbation of conscience, the feeling of
well-being, of "inner peace," is of the same order of emotions as the
artist's joy over his work—it proves nothing.... Self-contentment
proves no more in favour of that which gives rise to it, than its
absence can prove anything against the value of the thing which fails
to give rise to it. We are far too ignorant to be able to judge of the
value of our actions: in this respect we lack the ability to regard
things objectively. Even when we condemn an action, we do not do so
as judges,but as adversaries.... When noble sentiments accompany an
action, they prove nothing in its favour: an artist may present us
with an absolutely insignificant thing, though he be in the throes of
the most exalted pathos during its production. It were wiser to regard
these sentiments as misleading: they actually beguile our eye and our
power, away from criticism, from caution and from suspicion, and the
result often is that we makefoolsof ourselves ... they actually
make fools of us.295.We are heirs to the conscience-vivisection and self-crucifixion of two
thousand years: in these two practices lie perhaps our longest efforts
at becoming perfect, our mastery, and certainly our subtlety; we have
affiliated natural propensities with a heavy conscience.An attempt to produce an entirely opposite state of affairs would be
possible: that is to say, to affiliate all desires of a beyond, all
sympathy with things which are opposed to the senses, the intellect,
and nature—in fact, all the ideals that have existed hitherto (which
were all anti-worldly), with a heavy conscience.296.The greatcrimesinpsychology:—(1) That allpainandunhappinessshould have been falsified by
being associated with what is wrong (guilt). (Thus pain was robbed of
its innocence.)(2) That allstrong emotions(wantonness, voluptuousness, triumph,
pride, audacity, knowledge, assurance, and happiness in itself) were
branded as sinful, as seductive, and as suspicious.(3) Thatfeelings of weakness,inner acts of cowardice, lack of
personal courage, should have decked themselves in the most beautiful
words, and have been taught as desirable in the highest degree.(4) Thatgreatnessin man should have been given the meaning of
disinterestedness, self-sacrifice for another's good, for other people;
that even in the scientist and the artist, theelimination of the
individual personalityis presented as the cause of the greatest
knowledge and ability.(5) Thatloveshould have been twisted round to mean submission
(and altruism), whereas it is in reality an act of appropriation or
of bestowal, resulting in the last case from a superabundance in the
wealth of a given personality. Only thewholestpeople can love; the
disinterested ones, the "objective" ones, are the worst lovers (just
ask the girls!). This principle also applies to the love of God or of
the "home country": a man must be able to rely absolutely upon himself.
(Egotism may be regarded as thepre-eminence of the ego,altruism as
thepre-eminence of others.)(6) Life regarded as a punishment (happiness as a means of seduction);
the passions regarded as devilish; confidence in one's self as godless.The whole of psychology is a psychology of obstacles,a sort ofbarricadebuilt out of fear; on the one hand we find the masses (the
botched and bungled,the mediocre) defending themselves, by means of
it, against thestrong(and finallydestroyingthem in their growth
...); on the other hand, we find all the instincts with which these
classes are best able to prosper, sanctified and alone held in honour
by them. Let anyone examine the Jewish priesthood.297.The vestiges of the depreciation of Naturethrough moral
transcendence: The value of disinterestedness, the cult of altruism;
the belief in a reward in the play of natural consequences; the belief
in "goodness" and in genius itself, as if the one, like the other,
were theresult of disinterestedness; the continuation of the
Church's sanction of the life of the citizen; the absolutely deliberate
misunderstanding of history (as a means of educating up to morality)
or pessimism in the attitude taken up towards history (the latter
is just as much a result of the depreciation of Nature, as is thatpseudo-justificationof history, that refusal to see history as the
pessimistseesit).298."Morality for its own sake"—this is an important step in the
denaturalisation of morals: in itself it appears as a final value. In
this phase religion has generally become saturated with it: as, for
instance, in the case of Judaism. It likewise goes through a phase in
which itseparates itself fromreligion, and in which no God is
"moral" enough for it: it then prefers the impersonal ideal.... This is
how the case stands at present."Art for Art's sake": this is a similarly dangerous principle: by
this means a false contrast is lent to things—it culminates in the
slander of reality ("idealising"into the hateful). When an ideal
is severed from reality, the latter is debased, impoverished, and
calumniated."Beauty for Beauty's sake," "Truth for Truth's sake,"
"Goodness for Goodness' sake"—these are three forms of the evil eye
for reality.Art, knowledge, and moralityaremeans: instead of recognising a
life-promoting tendency in them, they have been associated with theopposite of Life—with "God"—they have also been regarded as
revelations of a higher world, which here and there transpires through
them...."Beautiful" and "ugly," "true" and "false," "good" and
"evil"—these things aredistinctionsandantagonismswhich
betray the preservative and promotive measures of Life, not necessarily
of man alone, but of all stable and enduring organisms which take up a
definite stand against their opponents. Thewarwhich thus ensues is
the essential factor: it is a means ofseparatingthings,leading to
strongerisolation....299.Moral naturalism: The tracing back of apparently independent and
supernatural values totheir real "nature"—that is to say, tonatural immorality,to natural "utility," etc.Perhaps I may designate the tendency of these observations by the termmoral naturalism: my object is to re-translate the moral values which
have apparently become independent andunnaturalinto their real
nature—that is to say, into their natural "immorality."N.B.—Refer to Jewish "holiness" and its natural basis. The case is
the same in regard tothe moral law which has been made sovereign,emancipated from its realfeature(until it is almost theoppositeof Nature).The stages in thedenaturalisation of morality(or so-called
"Idealisation"):—First it is a road to individual happiness,then it is the result of knowledge,then it is a Categorical Imperative,then it is a way to Salvation,then it is a denial of the will to live.(The gradual progress of thehostilityof morality toLife.)300.The suppressed and effacedHeresyin morality.—Concepts: paganism,
master-morality,virtù.301.My problem: What harm has mankind suffered hitherto from morals, as
also from its own morality? Intellectual harm, etc.302.Why are not human values once more deposited nicely in the rut to
which they alone have a right—as routinary values? Many species
of animals have already become extinct; supposing man were also to
disappear, nothing would be lacking on earth. A man should be enough of
a philosopher to admire even this "nothing" (Nil admirari).303.Man, a small species of very excitable animals,
which—fortunately—has its time. Life in general on earth is a
matter of a moment, an incident, an exception that has no consequence,
something which is of no importance whatever to the general character
of the earth; the earth itself is, like every star, a hiatus between
two nonentities, an event without a plan, without reason, will, or
self-consciousness—the worst kind of necessity—foolishnecessity....
Something in us rebels against this view; the serpent vanity whispers
to our hearts, "All this must be false because it is revolting....
Could not all this be appearance? And man in spite of all, to use
Kant's words"——4. How Virtue Is Made to Dominate.304.Concerning the ideal of the moralist.—In this treatise we wish to
speak of the greatpoliticsofvirtue. We wrote it for the use of
all those who are interested, not so much in the process of becoming
virtuous as in that of making others virtuous—in how virtueis made
to dominate.I even intend to prove that in order to desire this
one thing—the dominion of virtue—the other must be systematically
avoided; that is to say, one must renounce all hopes of becoming
virtuous. This sacrifice is great: but such an end is perhaps a
sufficient reward for such a sacrifice. And even greater sacrifices!...
And some of the most famous moralists have risked as much. For these,
indeed, had already recognised and anticipated the truth which is to
be revealed for the first time in this treatise: that thedominion of
virtueis absolutely attainableonly by the use of the same meanswhich are employed in the attainment of any other dominion, in any case
notbymeans of virtue itself....As I have already said, this treatise deals with the politics of
virtue: it postulates an ideal of these politics; it describes it as it
ought to be, if anything at all can be perfect on this earth. Now, no
philosopher can be in any doubt as to what the type of perfection is
in politics; it is, of course, Machiavellianism. But Machiavellianism
which ispur, sans mélange, cru, vert, dans toute sa force, dans
toute son âpreté,is superhuman, divine, transcendental, and can
never be achieved by man—the most he can do is to approximate it.
Even in this narrower kind of politics—in the politics of virtue—the
ideal never seems to have been realised. Plato, too, only bordered
upon it.Granted that one have eyes for concealed things, one can
discover, even in the most guileless and most consciousmoralists(and this is indeed the name of these moral politicians and of the
founders of all newer moral forces), traces showing that they too paid
their tribute to human weakness.They all aspiredto virtue on their
own account—at least in their moments of weariness; and this is the
leading and most capital error on the part of any moralist—whose duty
it is to be animmoralist in deeds.That he must not exactlyappear
to be the latter,is another matter. Or rather it isnotanother
matter: systematic self-denial of this kind (or, expressed morally:
dissimulation) belongs to, and is part and parcel of, the moralist's
canon and of his self-imposed duties: without it he can never attain
to his particular kind of perfection. Freedom from moralityand from
truthwhen enjoyed for that purpose which rewards every sacrifice: for
the sake of makingmorality dominate—that is the canon. Moralists
are in need of theattitudes of virtue,as also of the attitudes of
truth; their error begins when theyyieldto virtue, when they lose
control of virtue, when they themselves becomemoralortrue.A
great moralist is, among other things, necessarily a great actor; his
only danger is that his pose may unconsciously become a second nature,
just like his ideal, which is to keep hisesseand hisoperariapart in a divine way; everything he does must be donesub specie
boni—a lofty, remote, and exacting ideal! Adivineideal! And, as
a matter of fact, they say thatthe moralist thus imitates a model
which is no less than God Himself: God, the greatest Immoralist in
deeds that exists, but who nevertheless understands how to remain what
Heis,thegoodGod....305.The dominion of virtue is not established by means of virtue itself;
with virtue itself, one renounces power, one loses the Will to Power.306.The victory of a moral ideal is achieved by the same "immoral" means as
any other victory: violence, lies, slander, injustice.307.He who knows the way fame originates will be suspicious even of the
fame virtue enjoys.308.Morality is just as "immoral" as any other thing on earth; morality is
in itself a form of immorality.The greatreliefwhich this conviction brings. The contradiction
between things disappears, the unity of all phenomena issaved——309.There are some who actually go in search of what is immoral. When they
say: "this iswrong," they believe it ought to be done away with
or altered. On the other hand, I do not rest until I am quite clear
concerning theimmoralityof any particular thing which happens to
come under my notice. When I discover it, I recover my equanimity.310.A.The ways which lead to power: the presentation of the new virtue
under the name of anoldone,—the awakening of "interest" concerning
it ("happiness" declared to be its reward, andvice versâ),—artistic
slandering of all that stands in its way,—the exploitation of
advantages and accidents with the view of glorifying it,—the
conversion of its adherents into fanatics by means of sacrifices and
separations,—symbolismon a grand scale.B.Power attained: (1) Means of constraint of virtue; (2) seductive
means of virtue; (3) the (court) etiquette of virtue.311.By what means does a virtue attain to power?—With precisely the
same means as a political party: slander, suspicion, the undermining of
opposing virtues that happen to be already in power, the changing of
their names, systematic persecution and scorn; in short,by means of
acts of general "immorality."How does adesirebehave towards itself inorder to become avirtue?—A process of rechristening; systematic denial of its
intentions; practice in misunderstanding itself; alliance with
established and recognised virtues; ostentatious enmity towards its
adversaries. If possible, too, the protection of sacred powers must be
purchased; people must also be intoxicated and fired with enthusiasm;
idealistic humbug must be used, and a party must be won, whicheithertriumphsorperishes—one must beunconscious and naïf.312.Cruelty has become transformed and elevated into tragic pity, so that
we no longer recognise it as such. The same has happened to the love
of the sexes which has become amour-passion; the slavish attitude of
mind appears as Christian obedience; wretchedness becomes humility;
the disease of thenervus sympathicus,for instance, is eulogised as
Pessimism, Pascalism, or Carlylism, etc.313.We should begin to entertain doubts concerning a man if we heard that
he required reasons in order to remain respectable: we should, in any
case, certainly avoid his society. The little word "for" in certain
cases may be compromising; sometimes a single "for" is enough to
refute one. If we should hear, in course of time, that such-and-such
an aspirant for virtue was in need ofbadreasons in order to remain
respectable, it would notconduce to increasing our respect for him.
But he goes further; he comes to us, and tells us quite openly: "You
disturb my morality, with your disbelief, Mr. Sceptic; so long as you
cannot believe in mybad reasons,—that is to say, in my God, in a
disciplinary Beyond, in free will, etc.,—you put obstacles in the way
of my virtue.... Moral, sceptics must be suppressed: they prevent themoralisation of the masses."314.Our most sacred convictions, those which are permanent in us concerning
the highest values, arejudgments emanating from our muscles.315.Morality in the valuation of races and classes.—In view of the fact
that thepassionsandfundamental instinctsin every race and class
express the means which enable the latter to preserve themselves (or at
least the means which have enabled them to live for the longest period
of time), to call them "virtuous" practically means:That they change their character, shed their skins, and blot out their
past.It means that they should cease from differentiating themselves from
others.It means that they are getting to resemble each other in their needs
and aspirations—or, more exactly,that they are declining....It means that the will to one kind of moralityis merely thetyrannyof the particular species, which is adapted to that kind of morality,
over other species: it means a process of annihilation or general
levelling in favour of the prevailing species (whether it be to
render the non-prevailing species harmless, or to exploit them); the
"Abolition of Slavery"—a so-called tribute to "human dignity"; in
truth, theannihilationof a fundamentally different species (the
undermining of its values and its happiness).The qualities which constitute the strength of anopposing raceor
class are declared to be the most evil and pernicious things it has:
for by means of them it may be harmful to us (its virtues are slandered
and rechristened).When a man or a people harm us, their action constitutes an objection
against them: but from their point of view we are desirable, because we
are such as can be useful to them.The insistence upon spreading "humaneness" (which guilelessly starts
out with the assumption that it is in possession of the formula "What
is human") is all humbug, beneath the cover of which a certain definite
type of man strives to attain to power: or, more precisely, a very
particular kind of instinct—thegregarious instinct."The equality
of men": this is what liesconcealedbehind the tendency ofmakingever more and more menalikeas men.The "interested nature" of the morality of ordinary people.(The
trick was to elevate the great passions for power and property to the
positions of protectors of virtue.)To what extent do all kinds ofbusiness menand money-grabbers—all
those who give and take credit—find itnecessaryto promote the
levelling of all characters and notions of value? thecommerce and the
exchange of the worldleads to, and almost purchases, virtue.TheStateexercises the same influence, as does also any sort of
ruling power at the head of officials and soldiers;scienceacts in
the same way, in order that it may work in security and economise its
forces. And thepriesthooddoes the same.Communal morality is thus promoted here, because it is advantageous;
and, in order to make it triumph, war and violence are waged against
immorality—with what "right"? Without any right whatsoever; but in
accordance with the instinct of self-preservation. The same classes
avail themselves of immorality when it serves their purpose to do so.316.Observe the hypocritical colour which allcivil institutionsare
painted, just as if they werethe offshoots of morality—for
instance: marriage, work, calling, patriotism, the family, order,
and rights. But as they were all established in favour of themost
mediocretype of man, to protect him from exceptions and the need of
exceptions, one must not be surprised to find them sown with lies.317.Virtuemust be defended against its preachers: they are its worst
enemies. For they teach virtue as an idealfor all; they divest
virtue of the charm which consists in its rareness, its inimitableness,
its exceptional and non-average character—that is to say, of itsaristocratic charm.A stand must also be made against those
embittered idealists who eagerly tap all pots and are satisfied to
hear them ring hollow: what ingenuousness—todemandgreat and rare
things, and then to declare, with anger and contempt of one's fellows,
that they do not exist!—It is obvious, for instance, that amarriageis worth only as much as those are worth whom it joins—that is to say,
that on the whole it is something wretched and indecent: no priest or
registrar can make anything else of it.Virtue[6]has all the instincts of the average man against it: it is
not profitable, it is not prudent, and it isolates. It is related to
passion, and not very accessible to reason; it spoils the character,
the head, and the senses—always, of course, subject to the medium
standard of men; it provokes hostility towards order, and towards thelieswhich are concealed beneath all order, all institutions, and
all reality—when seen in the light of its pernicious influence uponothers,it isthe worst of vices.I recognise virtue in that: (1) it does not insist upon being
recognised; (2) it does not presuppose the existence of virtue
everywhere, but precisely something else; (3) it doesnot sufferfrom the absence of virtue, but regards it rather as a relation of
perspective which throws virtue into relief: it does not proclaim
itself; (4) it makes no propaganda; (5) it allows no one to pose as
judge because it is always apersonalvirtue; (6) it does precisely
what is generallyforbidden: virtue as I understand it is the actualvetitumwithin all gregarious legislation; (7) in short, I recognise
virtue in that it is in the Renaissance style—virtù—free from all
moralic acid....