[6]TRANSLATOR'S NOTE.—Virtue is used here, of course, in the
sense of "the excellence of man," not in the sense of the Christian
negative virtue.318.In the first place[7]Messrs. Virtue-mongers, you have no superiority
over us; we should like to make you takemodestya little more to
heart: it is wretched personal interests and prudence which suggest
your virtue to you. And if you had more strength and courage in your
bodies you would not lower yourselves thus to the level of virtuous
nonentities. You make what you can of yourselves: partly what you are
obliged to make,—that is to say, what your circumstances force you
tomake,—partly what suits your pleasure and seems useful to you.
But if you do only what is in keeping with your inclinations, or
what necessity exacts from you,59 or what is useful to you, you oughtneither to praise yourselves nor let others praise you!... One is
athoroughly puny kind of manwhen one isonlyvirtuous: nothing
should mislead you in this regard! Men who have to be considered at
all, were never such donkeys of virtue: their inmost instinct, that
which determined their quantum of power, did not find its reckoning
thus: whereas with your minimum amount of power nothing can seem more
full of wisdom to you than virtue. But themultitudeare on your
side: and because youtyranniseover us, we shall fight you....[7]TRANSLATOR'S NOTE.—Here Nietzsche returns to Christian
virtue which is negative and moral.319.Avirtuous manis of a lower species because, in the first place,
he has no "personality," but acquires his value by conforming with a
certain human scheme which has been once and for ever fixed. He has no
independent value: he may be compared; he has his equals, hemustnot
be an individual.Reckoning up the qualities of thegoodman, why is it they appear
pleasant to us? Because they urge us neither to war, to mistrust, to
caution, to the accumulating of forces, nor to severity: our laziness,
our good nature, and our levity, have agood time.This, ourfeeling
of well-being,iswhat we project intothe good man in the form of aquality,in the form of avaluable possession.320.Under certain circumstances, virtue is merely a venerable form of
stupidity: who could blame you for it? And this form of virtue has not
been outlived even to-day. A sort of honest peasant-simplicity, which
is possible, however, in all classes of society, and which one cannot
meet with anything else than a respectful smile, still thinks to-day
that everything is in good hands—that is to say, in "God's hands": and
when it supports this proposition with that same modest assurance as
that with which it would assert that two and two are four, we others
naturally refrain from contradiction.Why disturbthispure foolery? Why darken it with our cares
concerning man, people, goals, the future? Even if we wished to
do so, we shouldn't succeed.Inall things these people see the
reflection of their own venerable stupidity and goodness (in them the
old God—deus myops—still lives); we others see something else in
everything: our problematic nature, our contradictions, our deeper,
more painful, and more suspicious wisdom.321.He who finds a particular virtue an easy matter, ultimately laughs at
it. Seriousness cannot be maintained once virtue is attained. As soon
as a man has reached virtue, he jumps out of it—whither? Into devilry.Meanwhile, how intelligent all our evil tendenciesand impulses have
become! What an amount of inquisitiveness torments them! They are all
fishhooks of knowledge!322.The idea is to associate vice with something so terrible that at
last one is obliged to run away from it in order to be rid of its
associations. This is the well-known case of Tannhäuser. Tannhäuser,
brought to his wits' end by Wagnerian music, cannot endure life any
longer even in the company of Mrs. Venus: suddenly virtue begins to
have a charm for him; a Thuringian virgin goes up in price, and what
is even worse still, he shows a liking for Wolfram von Eschenbach's
melody....323.The Patrons of Virtue.—Lust of property, lust of power, laziness,
simplicity, fear; all these things are interested in virtue; that is
why it stands so securely.324.Virtueis no longer believed in; its powers of attraction are dead;
what is needed is some one who will once more bring it into the market
in the form of an outlandish kind of adventure and of dissipation. It
exacts too much extravagance and narrow-mindedness from its believers
to allow of conscience not being against it to-day. Certainly, for
people, without either consciences or scruples,this may constitute
its new charm: it is now what it has never been before—a vice.325.Virtue is still the most expensive vice:letit remain so!326.Virtues are as dangerous as vices, in so far as they are allowed to
rule over one as authorities and laws coming from outside, and not as
qualities one develops one's self. The latter is the only right way;
they should be the most personal means of defence and most individual
needs—the determining factors of preciselyourexistence and growth,
which we recognise and acknowledge independently of the question
whether others grow with us with the help of the same or of different
principles. This view of the danger of the virtue which is understood
as impersonal andobjectivealso holds good of modesty: through
modesty many of the choicest intellects perish. The morality of modesty
is the worst possible softening influence for those souls for which it
is pre-eminently necessary that they becomehardbetimes.327.The domain of morality must be reduced and limited step by step; the
names of the instincts which are really active in this sphere must be
drawn into the light of day and honoured, afterhave lain all
this time in the concealment of hypocritical names of virtue. Out of
respect for one's "honesty," which makes itself heard ever more and
more imperiously, one ought to unlearn the shame which makes one deny
and "explain away" all natural instincts. The extent to which one can
dispense with virtue is the measure of one's strength; and a height may
be imagined where the notion "virtue" is understood in such a way as
to be reminiscent ofvirtù—the virtue of the Renaissance—free from
moralic acid. But for the moment—how remote this ideal seems!The reduction of the domain of moralityis a sign of its progress.
Wherever, hitherto, thought has not been guided by causality, thinking
has taken amoralturn.328.After all, what have I achieved? Let us not close our eyes to this
wonderful result: I have lent newcharmsto virtue—it now affects
one in the same way as somethingforbidden.It has our most subtle
honesty against it, it is salted in the "cum grano salis" of the
scientific pang of conscience. It savours of antiquity and of old
fashion, and thus it is at last beginning to draw refined people and
to make them inquisitive—in short, it affects us like a vice. Only
after we have once recognised that everything consists of lies and
appearance, shall we have again earned the right to uphold this most
beautiful of all fictions—virtue. There will then remain no further
reason to deprive ourselves of it: only when we have shownvirtue to
be aform of immoralitydo we againjustify it,—it then becomes
classified, and likened, in its fundamental features, to the profound
and general immorality of all existence, of which it is then shown to
be a part. It appears as a form of luxury of the first order, the most
arrogant, the dearest, and rarest form of vice. We have robbed it of
its grimaces and divested it of its drapery; we have delivered it from
the importunate familiarity of the crowd; we have deprived it of its
ridiculous rigidity, its empty expression, its stiff false hair, and
its hieratic muscles.329.And is it supposed that I have thereby done any harm to virtue?... Just
as little as anarchists do to princes. Only since they have been shot
at, have they once more sat securely on their thrones.... For thus
it has always been and will ever be: one cannot do a thing a better
service than to persecute it and to run it to earth.... This—I have
done.5. The Moral Ideal.A.A Criticism of Ideals.330.It were the thing to begin this criticism in suchwise as to do away
with the word "Ideal": a criticism ofdesiderata.331.Only the fewest amongst us are aware of what is involved, from the
standpoint ofdesirability,in every "thus should it be, but it
is not," or even "thus it ought to have been": such expressions of
opinion involve a condemnation of the whole course of events. For
there is nothing quite isolated in the world: the smallest thing bears
the largest on its back; on thy small injustice the whole nature of
the future depends; the whole is condemned by every criticism which
is directed at the smallest part of it. Now granting that the moral
norm—even as Kant understood it—is never completely fulfilled, and
remains like a sort of Beyond hanging over reality without ever falling
down to it; then morality would contain in itself a judgment concerning
the whole, which would still, however, allow of the question:whence
does it get the right thereto?How does the part come to acquire this
judicial position relative to the whole? And if, as some have declared,
this moral condemnation of, and dissatisfaction with, reality, is
an ineradicable instinct, is it not possible that this instinct may
perhaps belong to the ineradicable stupidities and immodesties of our
species?—But in saying this, we are doing precisely what we deprecate;
the point of view of desirability and of unauthorised fault-finding
is part and parcel of the whole character of worldly phenomena just
as every injustice and imperfection is—it is our very notion of
"perfection" which is never gratified. Every instinct which desires
tobe indulged gives expression to its dissatisfaction with the
present state of things: how? Is the whole perhaps made up of a host
of dissatisfied parts, which all have desiderata in their heads? Is
the "course of things" perhaps "the road hence? the road leading away
from reality "—that is to say, eternal dissatisfaction in itself? Is
the conception of desiderata perhaps the essential motive-power of all
things? Is it—deus?***It seems to me of the utmost importance that we should rid ourselves
of the notion ofthewhole, of an entity, and of any kind of power
or form of the unconditioned. For we shall never be able to resist the
temptation of regarding it as the supreme being, and of christening
it "God." The "All" must be subdivided; we must unlearn our respect
for it, and reappropriate that which we have lent the unknown and an
imaginary entity, for the purposes of our neighbour and ourselves.
Whereas, for instance, Kant said: "Two things remain for ever worthy
of honour" (at the close of hisPractical Reason)—to-day we should
prefer to say: "Digestion is more worthy of honour." The concept,
"the All," will always give rise to the old problems, "How is evil
possible?" etc. Therefore,there is no "All",thereis nogreatsensoriumorinventariumor power-magazine.332.A man as heoughtto be: this sounds to me in just as bad taste as:
"A tree as it ought to be."333.Ethics: or the "philosophy of desirability."—"Thingsoughtto be
otherwise," "thingsoughtto become different": dissatisfaction
would thus seem the heart of ethics.One could find a way out of it, first, by selecting only those states
in which one is free from emotion; secondly, by grasping the insolence
and stupidity of the attitude of mind: for to desire that something
should be otherwise than it is, means to desire thateverythingshould be different—it involves a damaging criticism of the whole.But life itself consists in such desiring!To ascertainwhat exists, how it existsseems an ever so much higher
and more serious matter than every "thus should it be," because the
latter, as a piece of human criticism and arrogance, appears to be
condemned as ludicrous from the start. It expresses a need which would
fain have the organisation of the world correspond with our human
well-being, and which directs the will as much as possible towards the
accomplishment of that relationship.On the other hand, this desire, "thus it ought to be," has only called
forth that other desire, "what exists?" The desire of knowing what
exists, is already a consequence of the question, "how? is it possible?
Why precisely so?" Our wonder at the disagreement between our desires
and the course of the world has led to our learning to know the
course of the world. Perhaps the matter stands differently: maybe the
expression,"thus it ought to be," is merely the utterance of our
desire to overcome the world——334.To-day when every attempt at determining how man should be—is
received with some irony, when we adhere to the notion that in spite
of all one onlybecomeswhat oneis(in spite of all—that is to
say, education, instruction, environment, accident, and disaster),
in the matter of morality we have learnt, in a very peculiar way,
how toreversethe relation of cause and effect. Nothing perhaps
distinguishes us more than this from the ancient believers in morality.
We no longer say, for instance, "Vice is the cause of a man's
physical ruin," and we no longer say, "A man prospers with virtue
because it brings a long life and happiness." Our minds to-day are
much more inclined to the belief that vice and virtue are not causes
but onlyeffects.A man becomes a respectable member of society
because hewasa respectable man from the start—that is to say,
because he was born in possession of good instincts and prosperous
propensities.... Should a man enter the world poor, and the son of
parents who are neither economical nor thrifty, he is insusceptible
of being improved—that is to say, he is only fit for the prison or
the madhouse.... To-day we are no longer able to separate moral from
physical degeneration: the former is merely a complicated symptom of
the latter; a man is necessarily bad just as he is necessarily ill....
Bad: this word here standsfor a certainlack of capacitywhich is
related physiologically with the degenerating type—for instance, a
weak will, an uncertain and many-sided personality, the inability to
resist reacting to a stimulus and to control one's self, and a certain
constraint resulting from every suggestion proceeding from another's
will. Vice is not a cause; it is aneffect.... Vice is a somewhat
arbitrary-epitome of certain effects resulting from physiological
degeneracy. A general proposition such as that which Christianity
teaches, namely, "Man is evil," would be justified provided one were
justified in regarding a given type of degenerate man as normal. But
this may be an exaggeration. Of course, wherever Christianity prospers
and prevails, the proposition holds good: for then the existence of an
unhealthy soil—of a degenerate territory—is demonstrated.335.It is difficult to have sufficient respect for man, when one sees how
he understands the art of fighting his way, of enduring, of turning
circumstances to his own advantage, and of overthrowing opponents;
but when he is seen in the light of hisdesires,he is the most
absurd of all animals. It is just as if he required a playground
for his cowardice, his laziness, his feebleness, his sweetness, his
submissiveness, where he recovers from his strong virile virtues. Just
look at man's "desiderata" and his "ideals." Man, when hedesires,tries to recover from that which iseternally valuable in him, from
his deeds; and then he rushes into nonentity, absurdity, valuelessness,
childishness. The intellectual indigence and lack of inventive power of
this resourceful and inventive animal is simply terrible. The "ideal"
is at the same time the penalty man pays for the enormous expenditure
which he has to defray in all real and pressing duties.—Should reality
cease to prevail, there follow dreams, fatigue, weakness: an "ideal"
might even be regarded as a form of dream, fatigue, or weakness. The
strongest and the most impotent men become alike when this condition
overtakes them: theydeifythe cessation of work, of war, of
passions, of suspense, of contrasts, of "reality "—in short, of the
struggle for knowledge and of thetroubleof acquiring it."Innocence" to them is idealised stultification; "blessedness" is
idealised idleness; "love," the ideal state of the gregarious animal
that will no longer have an enemy. And thus everything that lowers and
belittles man is elevated to anideal.336.A desiremagnifiesthe thing desired; and by not being realised it
grows—thegreatest ideasare those which have been created by the
strongest and longest desiring. Things growever more valuablein our
estimation, the more our desire for them increases: if "moral values"
have become the highest values, it simply shows that the moral ideal
is the one which has beenrealised least(andthus itrepresented
the Beyond to all suffering,as a road toblessedness). Man,
with ever-increasing ardour, has only been embracingclouds: and
ultimately called his desperation and impotence "God."337.Think of thenaïvetéof all ultimate "desiderata"—when the
"wherefore" of man remains unknown.338.What is the counterfeit coinage of morality? First of all we should
know what "good and evil" mean. That is as good as wishing to know why
man is here, and what his goal or his destiny is. And that means that
one would fain know that man actuallyhasa goal or a destiny.339.The very obscure and arbitrary notion that humanity has a general
duty to perform, and that, as a whole, it is striving towards a
goal, is still in its infancy. Perhaps we shall once more be rid
of it before it becomes a "fixed idea." ... But humanity does not
constitute a whole: it is an indissoluble multiplicity of ascending
and descending organisms—it knows no such thing as a state of youth
followed bymaturityand then age. But its strata lie confused and
superimposed—and in a few thousand yearsthere may be even younger
types of men than we can point out to-day. Decadence, on the other
hand, belongs to all periods of human history: everywhere there is
refuse and decaying matter, such things are in themselves vital
processes; for withering and decaying elements must be eliminated.Under the empire of Christian prejudicethis question was never put
at all: the purpose of life seemed to lie in the salvation of the
individual soul; the question whether humanity might last for a long or
a short time was not considered. The best Christians longed for the end
to come as soon as possible;—concerning the needs of the individual,there seemed to be no doubt whatsoever.... The duty of every
individual for the present was identical with what it would be in any
sort of future for the man of the future: the value, the purpose, the
limit of values was for ever fixed, unconditioned, eternal, one with
God.... What deviated from this eternal type was impious, diabolic,
criminal.The centre of gravity of all values for each soul lay in that soul
itself: salvation or damnation! The salvation of theimmortalsoul!
The most extreme form ofpersonalisation....For each soul there
was only one kind of perfection; only one ideal, only one road to
salvation.... The most extreme form of the principle ofequal rights,associated with an optical magnification of individual importance to
the point of megalomania... Nothing but insanely important souls,
revolving round their own axes with unspeakable terror....***Nobody believes in these assumed airs of importance any longer
to-day: and we have sifted our wisdom through the sieve of contempt.
Nevertheless theoptical habitsurvives, which would fain measure the
value of man by his proximity to a certainideal maw.at bottom the
personalisation view is upheld as firmly as that of theequality of
rights as regards the ideal.In short: peopleseem to think that they
knowwhatthe ultimate desideratumis in regard to the ideal man....But this belief is merely the result of the exceedinglydetrimental
influenceof the Christian ideal, as anybody can discover for himself
every time he carefully examines the "ideal type." In the first place,
it is believed that the approach to a given "type" is desirable;secondly,that this particular type is known;thirdly,that every
deviation from this type is a retrograde movement, a stemming of the
spirit of progress, a loss of power and might in man.... To dream of a
state of affairs in which thisperfectman will be in the majority:
our friends the Socialists and even Messrs. the Utilitarians have not
reached a higher level than this. In this way anaimseems to have
crept into theevolutionof man: at any rate the belief in a certainprogress towards an idealis the only shape in which anaimisconceived in the history of mankind to-day. In short: the coming of the
"Kingdom of God" has been placed in the future, and has been given an
earthly, a human meaning—but on the whole the faith in theoldideal
is still maintained....340.The more concealed forms of the cult of Christian, moral ideals.—Theinsipid and cowardly notion "Nature"invented by Nature-enthusiasts
(without any knowledge whatsoever of the terrible, the implacable,
and the cynical element in even "the most beautiful" aspects), is
only a sort of attempt atreadingthe moral and Christian notion of
"humanity" into Nature;—Rousseau's concept of Nature, for instance,
which took for granted that "Nature" meant freedom, goodness,
innocence, equity, justice, andIdylls,was nothing more at bottom
than the cult of Christian morality. We should collect passages from
the poets in order to seewhatthey admired, in lofty mountains, for
instance. What Goethe had to do with them—why he admired Spinoza.
Absoluteignoranceconcerning the reasons of thiscult....Theinsipid and cowardly concept "Man"à la Comte and Stuart
Mill, is at times the subject of a cult.... This is only the
Christian moral ideal again under another name.... Refer also to the
freethinkers—Guyau for example.Theinsipid and cowardly concept "Art"which is held to mean sympathy
with all suffering and with everything botched and bungled (the samething happens tohistory,cf. Thierry): again it is the cult of the
Christian moral ideal.And now, as to the wholesocialistic ideal: it is nothing but a
blockheaded misunderstanding of the Christian moral ideal.341.The origin of the ideal.The examination of the soil out of which it
grows.A.Starting out from those "æsthetic" mental states during which the
world seems rounder, fuller, andmore perfect: we have the pagan
ideal with its dominating spirit of self-affirmation (people give of
their abundance). The highest type: theclassicalideal—regarded
as an expression of the successful nature ofallthe more important
instincts. In this classical ideal we findthe grand styleas the
highest style. An expression of the "will to power" itself. The
instinct which is most feareddares to acknowledge itself.B.Starting out from the mental states in which the world seemed
emptier, paler, and thinner, when "spiritualisation" and the absence
of sensuality assume the rank of perfection, and when all that is
brutal, animal, direct, and proximate is avoided (people calculate
and select): the "sage," "the angel"; priestliness = virginity =
ignorance, are the physiological ideals of such idealists: theanæmicideal. Under certain circumstances this anæmic ideal may be the ideal
of such natures asrepresentpaganism (thus Goethe sees his "saint"
in Spinoza).C.Starting out from those mental states in which the world seemed
more absurd, more evil, poorer, and more deceptive, an ideal cannot
even be imagined or desired in it (people deny and annihilate);
the projection of the ideal into the sphere of the anti-natural,
anti-actual, anti-logical; the state of him who judges thus (the
"impoverishment" of the world as a result of suffering:people take,
they no longer bestow): theanti-natural ideal.(TheChristian idealis atransitional formbetween the second
and the third, now inclining more towards the former type, and anon
inclining towards the latter.)The three ideals: A.Either astrengtheningof Life (paganism,)
orB.animpoverishmentof Life (anæmia), orC.adenialof
Life (anti-naturalism). The state of beatitude inA.is the feeling
of extreme abundance; inB.it is reached by the most fastidious
selectiveness; inC.it is the contempt and the destruction of Life.342.A.Theconsistenttype understands that even evil must not be
hated, must not be resisted, and that it is not allowable to make war
against one's self; that it does not suffice merely to accept the pain
which such behaviour brings in its train; that one lives entirely in
positive feelings; that one takes the side of one's opponents in wordand deed; that by means of a superfœtation of peaceful, kindly,
conciliatory, helpful, and loving states, one impoverishes the soil of
the other states, ... that one is in need of unremittingpractice.What is achieved thereby?—The Buddhistic type, or theperfectcow.This point of view is possible only where no moral fanaticism
prevails—that is to say, when evil is not hated on its own account,
but because it opens the road to conditions which are painful (unrest,
work, care, complications, dependence).This is the Buddhistic point of view: there is no hatred of sin, the
concept "sin," in fact, is entirely lacking.B.Theinconsistenttype. War is waged against evil—there is a
belief that war wagedfor Goodness' sakedoes not involve the same
moral results or affect character in the same way as war generally
does (and owing to which tendencies it is detested asevil).As a
matter of fact, a war of this sort carried on against evil is much
more profoundly pernicious than any sort of personal hostility; and
generally, it is "the person" which reassumes, at least in fancy, the
position of opponent (the devil, evil spirits, etc.). The attitude of
hostile observation and spying in regard to everything which may be
bad in us, or hail from a bad source, culminates in a most tormented
and most anxious state of mind: thus "miracles," rewards, ecstasy, and
transcendental solutions of the earth-riddle now becamedesirable.
... The Christian type: or theperfect bigot.C.Thestoicaltype. Firmness, self-control, imperturbability,
peace in the form of the rigidity of a will long active—profound
quiet, the defensive state, the fortress, the mistrust of war—firmness
of principles; the unity ofknowledgeandwill; great self-respect.
The type of the anchorite.The perfect blockhead.343.An ideal which is striving to prevail or to assert itself endeavours
to further its purpose(a)by laying claim to aspuriousorigin;(b)by assuming a relationship between itself and the powerful ideals
already existing;(c)by means of the thrill produced by mystery,
as though an unquestionable power were manifesting itself;(d)by
the slander of its opponents' ideals;(e)by a lying teaching of
the advantages which follow in its wake, for instance: happiness,
spiritual peace, general peace, or even the assistance of a mighty
God, etc.—Contributions to the psychology of the idealists: Carlyle,
Schiller, Michelet.Supposing all the means of defence and protection, by means of which an
ideal survives, are discovered, is it therebyrefuted? It has merely
availed itself of the means of which everything lives and grows—they
are all "immoral."My view: all the forces and instincts which are the source of life
are lying beneath theban of morality: morality is the life-denying
instinct. Morality must be annihilated if life is to be emancipated.344.Toavoidknowing himself is the prudence of the idealist. The
idealist: a creature who has reasons for remaining in the dark
concerning himself, and who is also clever enough to remain in the dark
concerning these reasons also.345.The tendency of moral evolution.—Every one's desire is that there
should be no other teaching and valuation of things than those by means
of which he himself succeeds. Thus thefundamental tendencyof theweakandmediocreof all times, has been toenfeeble the strong
and to reduce them to the level of the weak: their chief weapon in this
processwas themoral principle.The attitude of the strong towards
the weak is branded as evil; the highest states of the strong become
bad bywords.The struggle of the many against the strong, of the ordinary against
the extraordinary, of the weak against the strong: meets with one
of its finest interruptions in the fact that the rare, the refined,
the more exacting, present themselves as the weak, and repudiate the
coarser weapons of power.346.(1) The so-called pure instinct for knowledge of all philosophers
is dictated to them by their moral "truths," and is only seemingly
independent.(2) The "Moral Truths," "thus shall things bedone," are mere states
of consciousness of an instinct which has grown tired, "thus and thus
are things done by us." The "ideal" is supposed to re-establish and
strengthen an instinct; it flatters man to feel he can obey when he is
only an automaton.347.Morality as a means of seduction.—"Nature is good; for a wise
and good God is its cause. Who, therefore, is responsible for the
'corruption of man'? Tyrants and seducers and the ruling classes are
responsible—they must be wiped out": this is Rousseau's logic (compare
withPascalslogic, which concludes by an appeal to original sin).Refer also toLuther'slogic, which is similar. In both cases a
pretext is sought for the introduction of an insatiable lust of revenge
as amoral and religiousduty. The hatred directed against the ruling
classes tries tosanctifyitself ... (the "sinfulness of Israel" is
the basis of the priest's powerful position).Compare this withPaulslogic, which is similar. It is always under
the cover of God's business that these reactions appear, under the
cover of what is right, or of humanity, etc. In the case ofChristthe rejoicings of the people appear as the cause of His crucifixion.
It was an anti-priestly movement from the beginning. Even in the
anti-Semitic movement we find the same trick: the opponent is overcome
with moral condemnations, and those who attack him pose asretributive
Justice.348.The incidents of the fight: the fighter tries to transform his
opponent into theexact oppositeof himself—imaginatively, of
course. He tries to believe in himself to such an extent that he may
have the courage necessary for the "good Cause" (as if he were thegood Cause); as if reason, taste, and virtue were being assailed
by his opponents.... The belief of which he is most in need, as the
strongest means of defence and attack,is the belief in himself,which, however, knows how to misinterpret itself as a belief in
1God. He never pictures the advantages and the uses of victory, but
only understands victory for the sake of victory—for God's sake.
Every small community (or individual), finding itself involved in
a struggle, strives to convince itself of this: "Good taste, good
judgment, and virtue are ours." War urges people to thisexaggerated
self-esteem....349.Whatever kind ofeccentric idealone may have (whether as
a "Christian," a "free-spirit," an "immoralist," or a German
Imperialist), one should try to avoid insisting upon its beingtheideal; for, by so doing, it is deprived of all its privileged nature.
One should have an ideal as a distinction; one should not propagate it,
and thus level one's self down to the rest of mankind.How is it, that in spite of this obvious fact, the majority of
idealists indulge in propaganda fortheir ideal, just as if they had
no right to it unless themajorityacquiesce therein?—For instance,
all those plucky and insignificant girls behave in this way, who claim
the right to study Latin and mathematics. What is it urges them to do
this? I fear it is the instinct of the herd, and the terror of the
herd: they fight for the "emancipation of woman," because they are best
able to achieve their own private little distinction by fighting for it
under the cover of acharitable movement,under the banner bearing
the device "For others."Theclevernessof idealists consists in their persistently posing
as the missionaries and "representatives" of an ideal: they thus
"beautify" themselves in the eyes of those who still believe in
disinterestedness and heroism. Whereas real heroism consists,notin fighting under the banner of self-sacrifice, submission, and
disinterestedness, but innot fighting at all.... "I am thus; I will
be thus—and you can go to the devil!"350.Everyideal assumeslove, hate, reverence,andcontempt.Either
positive feeling is theprimum mobile,or negative feeling is.Hatredandcontemptare theprimum mobilein all the ideals which
proceed from resentment.B.A Criticism of the "Good Man" of the Saint, etc.351.The "good man" Or, hemiplegia of virtue.—In the opinion of every
strong and natural man,love and hate, gratitude and revenge, goodness
and anger, affirmative and negative action, belong to each other. A
man is good on condition that he knows how to be evil; a man is evil,
because otherwise he would not know how to be good. Whence comes
the morbidness and ideological unnaturalness which repudiates these
compounds—which teaches a sort of one-sided efficiency as the highest
of all things? Whence this hemiplegia of virtue, the invention of the
good man? The object seems to be to make man amputate those instincts
which enable him to be an enemy, to be harmful, to be angry, and to
insist upon revenge.... This unnaturalness, then, corresponds to that
dualistic concept of a wholly good and of a wholly bad creature (God,
Spirit, Man); in the first are found all the positive, in the second
all the negative forces, intentions, and states. This method of valuing
thus believes itself to be "idealistic"; it never doubts that in its
concept of the "good man," it has found the highest desideratum. When
aspiring to its zenith it fancies a state in which all evil is wiped
out, and in which only good creatures have actually remained over.
It does not therefore regard the mutual dependence of the opposites
good and evil as proved. On the contrary, the latter ought to vanish,
and the former should remain. The first has a right to exist, the
second ought notto be with us at all....What, as a matter of fact,
is the reason of this desire? In all ages, and particularly in the
Christian age, much labour has been spent in trying to reduce men
to this one-sided activity:and even to-day, among those who have
been deformed and weakened by the Church, people are not lacking who
desire precisely the same thing with their "humanisation" generally,
or with their "Will of God," or with their "Salvation of the Soul."
The principal injunction behind all these things is, that man should
no longer do anything evil, that he should under no circumstances be
harmful ordesireharm. The way to arrive at this state of affairs is
to amputate all hostile tendencies, to suppress all the instincts of
resentment, and to establish "spiritual peace" as a chronic disease.This attitude of mind, in which a certain type of man is bred,
starts out with this absurd hypothesis: good and evil are postulated
as realities which are in a state of mutual contradiction (not as
complementary values, which they are), people are advised to take the
side of the good, and it is insisted upon that a good man resists
and forswears evil until every trace of it is uprooted—but with
this valuation Life is actually denied,for in all its instincts
Life has both yea and nay. But far from understanding these facts,
this valuation dreams rather of returning to the wholeness, oneness,
and strengthfulness of Life: it actually believes that a state of
blessedness will be reached when the inner anarchy and state of unrest
which result from these opposed impulses is brought to an end.—It is
possible that no more dangerous ideology, no greater mischiefin the
science of psychology,has ever yet existed, as this will to good: the
most repugnant type of man has been reared, the man who isnot free,the bigot; it was taught that only in the form of a bigot could one
tread the path which leads to God, and that only a bigot's life could
be a godly life.And even here, Life is still in the right—Life that knows not how to
separate Yea from Nay: what is the good of declaring with all one's
might that war is an evil, that one must harm no one, that one must
not act negatively? One is still waging a war even in this, it is
impossible to do otherwise! The good man who has renounced all evil,
and who is afflicted according to his desire with the hemiplegia of
virtue, does not therefore cease from waging war, or from making
enemies, or from saying "nay" and doing "nay." The Christian, for
instance, hates "sin"!—and what on earth is there which he does
not call "sin"! It is precisely because of his belief in a moral
antagonism between good and evil, that the world for him has grown
so full of hatefulness and things that must be combated eternally.
The "good man" sees himself surrounded by evil, and, thanks to the
continual onslaughts of the latter, his eye grows more keen, and in
the end discovers traces of evil in every one of his acts. And thus he
ultimately arrives at the conclusion, which to him is quite logical,
that Nature is evil, that man is corrupted, and that being good is an
act of grace (that is to say, it is impossible to man when he stands
alone). In short:he denies Life,he sees how "good," as the highest
value,condemnsLife.... And thus his ideology concerning good and
evilought to strike him as refuted. But one cannot refute a disease.
Therefore he is obliged to conceiveanotherlife!...352.Power, whether in the hands of a god or of a man, is always understood
to consist in the ability toharmas well as tohelp.This is the
case with the Arabs and with the Hebrews, in fact with all strong and
well-constituted races.The dualistic separation of the two powers is fatal.... In this way
morality becomes the poisoner of life.353.A criticism of the good man.—Honesty, dignity, dutifulness, justice,
humanity, loyalty, uprightness, clean conscience—is it really supposed
that, by means of these fine-sounding words, the qualities they stand
for are approved and affirmed for their own sake? Or is it this, that
qualities and states indifferent in themselves have merely been looked
at in a light which lends them some value? Does the worth of these
qualities lie in themselves, or in the use and advantages to which they
lead (or to which they seem to lead, to which they are expected to
lead)?I naturally do not wish to imply that there is any opposition between
theegoand thealterin the judgment: the question is, whether
it is theresultsof these qualities, either in regard to him who
possesses them or in regard to environment,society, "humanity," which
lend them their value; or whether they have a value in themselves....
In other words: is itutilitywhich bids men condemn, combat, and
deny the opposite qualities (duplicity, falseness, perversity, lack
of self-confidence, inhumanity)? Is the essence of such qualities
condemned, or only their consequences? In other words: were itdesirablethat there should exist no men at all possessed of such
qualities?In any case, this is believed.... But here lies the error,
the shortsightedness, the monocularity ofnarrow egoism.Expressed otherwise: would it be desirable to create circumstances in
which the whole advantage would be on the side of the just—so that
all those with opposite natures and instincts would be discouraged and
would slowly become extinct?At bottom, this is a question of taste and ofæsthetics: should we
desire the most honourable types of men—that is to say, the greatest
bores—alone to subsist? the rectangular, the virtuous, the upright,
the good-natured, the straightforward, and the "blockheads"?If one can imagine the total suppression of the huge number
constituting the "others," even the just man himself ceases from having
a right to exist,—he is, in fact, no longer necessary,—and in this
way it is seen that coarse utility alone could have elevated such aninsufferablevirtue to a place of honour.Desirability may lie precisely on the other side. It might be better
to create conditions in which the "just man" would be reduced to
the humbleposition of a "useful instrument"—an "ideal gregarious
animal," or at best a herdsman: in short, conditions in which he would
no longer stand in the highest sphere, which requiresother qualities.354.The "good man" as a tyrant—Mankind has always repeated the same
error: it has always transformed a mere vital measure into themeasureand standard of life;—instead of seeking the standard in
the highest ascent of life, in the problem of growth and exhaustion,
it takes thepreservative measuresof a very definite kind of life,
and uses them to exclude all other kinds of life, and even to criticise
Life itself and to select from among its forms. That is to say, man
ultimately forgets that measures are a means to an end, and gets to
like them for themselves: they take the place of a goal in his mind,
and even become the standard of goals to him—that is to say,a given
species of manregards his means of existence as the only legitimate
means, as the means which ought to be imposed upon all, as "truth,"
"goodness," "perfection": the given species, in fact, begins totyrannise.... It is aform of faith,of instinct, when a certain
species of man does not perceive that his kind has been conditioned,
when he does not understand his relation to other species. At any rate,
any species of men (a people or a race) seems to be doomed as soon as
it becomes tolerant, grants equal rights, and no longer desires to be
master.355."All good people are weak: they are good because they are not strong
enough to be evil," said the Latuka chieftain Comorro to Baker.***"Disasters are not to the faint-hearted," is a Russian proverb.356.Modest, industrious, benevolent, and temperate: thus you would that
men were?—thatgood menwere? But such men I can only conceive as
slaves, the slaves of the future.357.The metamorphoses of slavery; its disguise in the cloak of religion;
its transfiguration through morality.358.The ideal slave(the "good man").—He who cannot regard himself
as a "purpose," and who cannot give himself any aim whatsoever,
instinctively honours the morality ofunselfishness.Everything urges
him to this morality: his prudence, his experience, and his vanity. And
even faith is a form of self-denial.***Atavism: delightful feeling, to be able to obey unconditionally for
once.***Industry, modesty, benevolence, temperance, are just so manyobstaclesin the way ofsovereign sentiments,of greatingenuity,of an heroic purpose, of noble existence for one's self.***It is not a question ofgoing ahead(to that end all that is required
is to be at best a herdsman, that is to say, the prime need of the
herd), it is rather a matter ofgetting along alone,ofbeing able
to be another.359.We must realiseallthat has been accumulated as the result of
the highest moralidealism: how almostall other valueshave
crystallised round it. This shows that it has been desired fora very
long timeand with thestrongest passions—and that it has not yet
been attained: otherwise it would havedisappointedeverybody (that
is to say, it would have been followed by a more moderate valuation).Thesaintas themost powerful typeof man:thisideal it is
which has elevated the value of moral perfection so high. One would
think that the whole of science had been engaged in proving that themoralman is the mostpowerfuland most godly.—The conquest of the
senses and the passions—everything inspiredterror;—the unnatural
seemed to the spectators to besupernaturalandtranscendental....360.Francis of Assisi: amorous and popular, a poet who combats the order
of rank among souls, in favour of the lowest. The denial of spiritual
hierarchy—"all alike before God."Popular ideals: the good man, the unselfish man, the saint, the sage,
the just man. O Marcus Aurelius!361.I have declared war against the anæmic Christian ideal (together with
what is closelyIrelated to it), not because I want to annihilate
it, but only to put an end to itstyrannyand clear the way for
otherideals,formore robustideals.... Thecontinuanceof the
Christian ideal belongs to the most desirable of desiderata: if only
for the sake of the ideals which wish to take their stand beside it and
perhaps above it—they must have opponents, and strong ones too, in
order to growstrongthemselves. That is why we immoralists require
thepowerofmorality,our instinct of self-preservation insists
upon our opponents maintaining their strength—all it requires is tobecome master of them.C.Concerning the Slander of the so-called Evil Qualities.362.Egoism and its problem! The Christian gloominess of La Rochefoucauld,
who saw egoismin everything, and imagined that he had thereforereducedthe worth of things and virtues! In opposition to him,
I first of all tried to show that nothing elsecouldexist save
egoism,—that in those men whoseegois weak and thin, the power to
love also grows weak,—that the greatest lovers are such owing to the
strength of theirego,—that love is an expression of egoism, etc.
As a matter of fact, the false valuation aims at the interest of those
who find it useful, whom it helps—in fact, the herd; it fosters a
pessimistic mistrust towards the basis of Life; it would fain undermine
the most glorious and most well-constituted men (out of fear); it would
assist the lowly to have the upper hand of their conquerors; it is the
cause of universal dishonesty, especially in the most useful type of
men.363.Man is an indifferent egoist: even the cleverest regards his habits as
more important than his advantage.364.Egoism! But no one has yet asked:whatis theegolike? Everybody
is rather inclined to see allegosalike. This is the result of the
slave theory, ofuniversal suffrage,and of "equality."365.The behaviour of a higher man is the result of a very complex set of
motives: any word such as "pity"betraysnothing of this complexity.
Themost important factor is the feeling, "who am I? who is the other
relative to me?"—Thus the valuing spirit is continually active.366.To think that the history of all moral phenomena may be simplified, as
Schopenhauer thought,—that is to say, thatpityis to be found at
the root of every moral impulse that has ever existed hitherto,—is
to be guilty of a degree of nonsense and ingenuousness worthy only
of a thinker who is devoid of all historical instincts and who has
miraculously succeeded in evading the strong schooling in history which
the Germans, from Herder to Hegel, have undergone.367.My "pity."—This is a feeling for which I can find no adequate
term: I feel it when I am in the presence of any waste of precious
capabilities, as, for instance, when I contemplate Luther: what power
and what tasteless problems fit for back-woodsmen! (At a time when the
brave and light-hearted scepticism of a Montaigne was already possible
in France!) Or when I see some one standing below where he might have
stood, thanks to the development of a set of perfectly senseless
accidents. Or even when, with the thought of man's destiny in my mind,
I contemplate with horror and contempt the whole system of modern
European politics, which is creating the circumstancesand weaving
the fabric of thewholefuture of mankind. Yes, to what could not
"mankind" attain, if——! This is my "pity"; despite the fact that no
sufferer yet exists with whom I sympathise in this way.368.Pity is a waste of feeling, a moral parasite which is injurious to
the health, "it cannot possibly be our duty to increase the evil in
the world." If one does good merely out of pity, it is one's self and
not one's neighbour that one is succouring. Pity does not depend upon
maxims, but upon emotions. The suffering we see infects us; pity is an
infection.369.There is no such thing as egoism which keeps within its bounds and
does not exceed them—consequently, the "allowable," the "morally
indifferent" egoism of which some people speak, does not exist at all."One is continually promoting the interests of one's 'ego' at the
cost of other people "; "Living consists in living at the cost of
others"—he who has not grasped this fact, has not taken the first step
towards truth to himself.370.The "subject" is a piece of fiction: theegoof which every one
speaks when he blames egoism, does not exist at all.371.Our "ego"—which isnotone with the unitary controlling force of our
beings!—is really only an imagined synthesis; therefore there canbeno "egoistic"actions.372.Since all instincts are unintelligent, utility cannot represent a
standpoint as far as they are concerned. Every instinct, when it is
active, sacrifices strength and other instincts into the bargain: in
the end it is stemmed, otherwise it would be the end of everything
owing to the waste it would bring about. Thus: that which is
"unegoistic," self-sacrificing, and imprudent is nothing in particular
—it is common to all the instincts; they do not consider the welfare
of the wholeego(because they simply do not think!), they act
counter to our interests, against theego: and oftenfortheego—innocent in both cases!373.The origin of moral values.—Selfishness has as much value as the
physiological value of him who possesses it. Each individual represents
the whole course of Evolution, and he is not, as morals teach,
something that begins at his birth. If he represent theascentof the
line of mankind, his value is, in fact, very great; and the concern
about his maintenance and the promoting of his growth may even be
extreme. (It is the concern about thepromise of the future in him
which gives the well-constituted individual such an extraordinary right
to egoism.) If he representdescendingdevelopment, decay, chronic
sickening, he has little worth: and the greatest fairness would have
him take as little room, strength, and sunshine as possible from the
well-constituted. In this case society's duty is tosuppress egoism(for the latter may sometimes manifest itself in an absurd, morbid,
and seditious manner): whether it be a question of the decline and
pining away of single individuals or of whole classes of mankind. A
morality and a religion of "love," thecurbingof the self-affirming
spirit, and a doctrine encouraging patience, resignation, helpfulness,
and co-operation in word and deed may be of the highest value within
the confines of such classes, even in the eyes of their rulers:
for it restrains the feelings of rivalry, of resentment, and of
envy,—feelings which are only too natural in the bungled and the
botched,—and it even deifies them under the ideal of humility, of
obedience, of slave-life, of being ruled, of poverty, of illness, and
of lowliness. This explains why the ruling classes (or races) and
individuals of all ages have always upheld the cult of unselfishness,
the gospel of the lowly and of "God on the Cross."The preponderance of an altruistic way of valuing is the result of
a consciousness of the fact that one is botched and bungled. Upon
examination, this point of view turns out to be: "I am not worth
much," simply a psychological valuation; more plainly still: it is
the feeling of impotence, of the lack of the great self-assertingimpulses of power (in muscles, nerves, and ganglia). This valuation
gets translated, according to the particular culture of these classes,
into a moral or religious principle (the pre-eminence of religious or
moral precepts is always a sign of low culture): it tries to justify
itself in spheres whence, as far as it is concerned, the notion "value"
hails. The interpretation by means of which the Christian sinner
tries to understand himself, is an attempt at justifying his lack of
power and of self-confidence: he prefers to feel himself a sinner
rather than feel bad for nothing: it is in itself a symptom of decay
when interpretations of this sort are used at all. In some cases the
bungled and the botched do not look for the reason of their unfortunate
condition in their own guilt (as the Christian does), but in society:
when, however, the Socialist, the Anarchist, and the Nihilist are
conscious that their existence is something for which some one must
beguilty,they are very closely related to the Christian, who also
believes that he can more easily endure his ill ease and his wretched
constitution when he has found some one whom he can holdresponsiblefor it. The instinct ofrevengeandresentmentappears in both
cases here as a means of enduring life, as a self-preservative measure,
as is also the favour shown toaltruistictheory and practice. Thehatred of egoism,whether it be one's own (as in the case of the
Christian), or another's (as in the case of the Socialists), thus
appears as a valuation reached under the predominance of revenge; and
also as an act of prudence on the part of the preservative instinct
of the suffering, in the formof an increase in their feelings of
co-operation and unity.... At bottom, as I have already suggested,
the discharge of resentment which takes place in the act of judging,
rejecting, and punishing egoism (one's own or that of others) is
still a self-preservative measure on the part of the bungled and the
botched. In short: the cult of altruism is merely a particular form of
egoism, which regularly appears under certain definite physiological
circumstances.When the Socialist, with righteous indignation, cries for "justice,"
"rights," "equal rights," it only shows that he is oppressed by his
inadequate culture, and is unable to understand why he suffers: he
also finds pleasure in crying;—if he were more at ease he would take
jolly good care not to cry in that way: in that case he would seek his
pleasure elsewhere. The same holds good of the Christian: he curses,
condemns, and slanders the "world"—and does not even except himself.
But that is no reason for taking him seriously. In both cases we are
in the presence of invalids who feel better for crying, and who find
relief in slander.374.Every society has a tendency to reduce its opponents tocaricatures,—at least in its own imagination,—as also to
starve them. As an example of this sort of caricature we have our
"criminal." In the midst of the Roman and aristocratic order of
values, theJewwas reducedto a caricature. Among artists, "Mrs.
Grundy and the bourgeois" become caricatures; while among pious
people it is the heretics, and among aristocrats, the plebeian. Among
immoralists it is the moralist. Plato, for instance, inmybooks
becomes a caricature.375.All the instincts and forces which morality praises, seem to me to
be essentially the same as those which it slanders and rejects: for
instance, justice as will to power, will to truth as a means in the
service of the will to power.376.Theturning ofman'snature inwards.The process of turning a
nature inwards arises when, owing to the establishment of peace and
society, powerful instincts are prevented from venting themselves
outwardly, and strive to survive harmlessly inside in conjunction with
the imagination. The need of hostility, cruelty, revenge, and violence
is reverted, "it steps backwards"; in the thirst for knowledge there
lurks both the lust of gain and of conquest; in the artist, the powers
of dissimulation and falsehood find their scope; the instincts are thus
transformed into demons with whom a fight takes place, etc.377.Falsity.—Everysovereign instinctmakes the others its
instruments, its retainers and its sycophants:it never allows itself
to be called by its more hateful name: and it brooks no terms of praise
in which it cannotindirectlyfind its share. Around every sovereign
instinct all praise and blame in general crystallises into a rigorous
form of ceremonial and etiquette. This isoneof the causes of
falsity.Everyinstinctwhich aspires to dominion,but which finds itself
under a yoke, requisitions all the most beautiful names and themost generally acceptedvalues to strengthen it and to support its
self-esteem, and this explains whyas a ruleit dares to come forward
under the name of the "master" it is combating and from whom it would
be free (for instance, under the domination of Christian values, the
desires of the flesh and of power act in this way). This is theothercause of falsity.In both casescomplete ingenuousnessreigns: the falsenessnevereven occurs to the mind of those concerned. It is the sign of abrokeninstinct when man sees the motive force and its "expression"
("the mask") as separate things—it is a sign of inner contradiction
and is much less formidable. Absoluteinnocencein bearing, word,
and passion, a "good conscience" in falseness, and the certainty
wherewith all the grandest and most pompous words and attitudes are
appropriated—all these things are necessary for victory.In theother case: that is to say, whenextreme clearsightednessis present, the genius of theactoris needful as well as tremendous
discipline in self-control,if victory is to be achieved. That is why
priests are the cleverest andmost conscioushypocrites; and then
come princes, in whom their position in life and their antecedents
account for a certain histrionic gift. Society men and diplomatists
come third, and women fourth.The fundamental thought: Falsity seems so deep, so many-sided, and
thewillis directed so inexorably against perfect self-knowledge
and accurate self-classification, that one isvery probably right in
supposing that Truthandthe will to truthare perhaps something
quite different and onlydisguises.(The need offaithis the
greatest obstacle in the way of truthfulness.)378."Thou shalt not tell a falsehood": people insist upon truthfulness. But
the acknowledgment of facts (the refusal to allow one's self to be lied
to) has always been greatest with liars: they actually recognised the
reality of this popular "truthfulness." There is too much or too little
being said continually: to insist upon people'sexposing themselveswith every word they say, is a piece of naïveté.People say what they think, they are "truthful"; butonly under
certain circumstances: that is to say, provided they beunderstood(inter pares), and understood with good will into the bargain (once
more inter pares). One conceals one's self in the presence of theunfamiliar: and he who would attain to something, says what he would
fain havepeople think about him, butnotwhat he thinks. ("The
powerful man is always a liar.")**379.The great counterfeit coinage of Nihilism concealed beneath an artful
abuse of moral values:—(a)Love regarded as self-effacement; as also pity.(b)Themost impersonal intellect("the philosopher") can know thetruth, "the true essence and nature of things."(c)Genius,great menaregreat,because they do not strive
to further their own interests: thevalueof manincreasesin
proportion as he effaces himself.(d)Art as the work of the "pure free-willed subject";
misunderstanding of "objectivity."(e)Happiness as the object of life:virtueas a means to an end.The pessimistic condemnation of life by Schopenhauer is amoralone.
Transference of the gregarious standards into the realm of metaphysics.The "individual" lacks sense, he must therefore have his origin in "the
thing in itself" (and the significance of his existence must be shown
to be "error"); parents are only an "accidental cause."—The mistake
on the part of science in considering the individual as the result of
all past life instead of the epitome of all past life, is now becoming
known.380.1. Systematicfalsification of history,so that it may present a
proof of the moral valuation:(a)The decline of a people and corruption.(b)The rise of a
people and virtue.(c)The zenith of a people ("its culture")
regarded as the result of high moral excellence.2. Systematic falsification ofgreat men, great creators,andgreat
periods.The desire is to makefaiththat which distinguishes great
men: whereas carelessness in this respect, scepticism, "immorality,"
the right to repudiate a belief, belongs to greatness (Cæsar, Frederick
the Great, Napoleon; but also Homer, Aristophanes, Leonardo, Goethe).
The principal fact—their "free will"—is always suppressed.381.A greatliein history; as if thecorruption of the Church were the
causeof the Reformation! This was only the pretext and self-deception
of the agitators—very strong needs were making themselves felt, the
brutality of which sorely required a spiritual dressing.382.Schopenhauer declared high intellectuality to be theemancipationfrom the will: he did not wish to recognise the freedom from moral
prejudices which is coincident with the emancipationof a great mind;
he refused to see what is the typical immorality of genius; he artfully
contrived to set up the only moral value he honoured—self-effacement,
as the oneconditionof highest intellectual activity: "objective"
contemplation. "Truth," even in art, only manifests itself after the
withdrawal of thewill....Through all moral idiosyncrasies I see afundamentally different
valuation.Such absurd distinctions as "genius" and the world of will,
of morality and immorality,I know nothing about at all.The moral is
a lower kind of animal than the immoral, he is also weaker; indeed—he
is a type in regard to morality, but he is not a type of his own. He
is a copy; at the best, a good copy—the standard of his worth lieswithouthim. I value a man according to thequantum of power and
fullness of his will: not according to the enfeeblement and moribund
state thereof. I consider that a philosophy whichteachesthe denial
of will is both defamatory and slanderous.... I test thepowerof
awillaccording to the amount of resistance it can offer and the
amount of pain and torture it can endure and know how to turn to its
own advantage; I do not point to the evil and pain of existence with
the finger of reproach, but rather entertain the hope that life may one
day be more evil and more full of suffering than it has ever been.