The zenith of intellectuality, according to Schopenhauer, was to arrive
at the knowledge that all is to no purpose—in short, to recognise what
the good man alreadydoesinstinctively....He denies that there can
be higher states of intellectuality—he regards his view as anon plus
ultra.... Here intellectuality is placed much lower than goodness; its
highest value (as art, for instance) would be to lead up to, and to
advise the adoption of, morality, the absolute predominance ofmoral
values.Next to Schopenhauer I will now characteriseKant: there was nothing
Greek in Kant; he was quite anti-historical (cf. his attitude in
regard to the French Revolution) and a moral fanatic (see Goethe's
words concerning the radically evil element in human nature[8]).Saintlinessalso lurked somewhere in his soul.... I require a
criticism of the saintly type.Hegel's value: "Passion."Herbert Spencer's tea-grocer's philosophy: total absence of an ideal
save that of the mediocre man.Fundamental instinct of all philosophers, historians, and
psychologists: everything ofvaluein mankind, art, history, science,
religion, and technology must be shown to bemorally valuableandmorally conditioned,in its aim, means, and result. Everything is
seen in the light of this highest value; for instance, Rousseau's
question concerning civilisation, "Will it make man grow better?"—a
funny question, for the reverse isobvious,and is a fact which
speaksin favourof civilisation.[8]TRANSLATOR'S NOTE.—This is doubtless a reference to a
passage in a letter written by Goethe to Herder, on 7th June 1793,
from the camp at Marienborn, near Mainz, in which the following
words occur:—"Dagegen hat aber auch Kant seinen philosophischen
Mantel, nachdem er ein langes Menschenleben gebraucht hat, ihn von
mancherlei sudelhaften Vorurteilen zu reinigen, freventlich mit dem
Schandfleck des radikalen Bösen beschlabbert, damit doch auch Christen
herbeigelockt werden den Saum zu küssen?—("Kant, on the other hand,
after he had tried throughout his life to keep his philosophical cloak
unsoiled by foul prejudices, wantonly dirtied it in the end with the
disreputable stain of the 'radical evil' in human nature, in order that
Christians too might be lured into kissing its hem.") From this passage
it will be seen how Goethe had anticipated Nietzsche's view of Kant;
namely, that he was a Christian in disguise.383.Religious morality.—Passion, great desire; the passion for power,
love, revenge, and property: the moralists wish to uproot and
exterminate all these things, and "purify" the soul by driving them out
of it.The argument is: the passions often lead to disaster—therefore, they
are evil and ought to be condemned. Man must wring himself free from
them, otherwise he cannot be agoodman....This is of the same nature as: "If thy right eye offend thee, pluck it
out." In this particular case when, with that "bucolic simplicity,"
the Founder of Christianity recommended a certain practice to His
disciples, in the event of sexual excitement, the result would not be
only the loss of a particular member, but the actual castration of the
whole of the man's character.... And the same applies to the moral
mania, which, instead of insisting upon the control of the passions,
sues fortheir extirpation. Its conclusion always is: only the
emasculated man is a good man.Instead of making use of and ofeconomisingthe great sources of
passion, those torrents of the soul which are often so dangerous,
overwhelming, and impetuous, morality—this most shortsighted and most
corrupted of mental attitudes—would fain make themdry up.384.Conquest over the passions?—No, not if this is to mean their
enfeeblement and annihilation.They must be enlisted in our service:
and to this end it may be necessary to tyrannise them a good deal (not
as individuals, but as communities, races, etc.). At length we should
trust them enough to restore their freedom to them: they love us like
good servants, and willingly go wherever our best interests lie.385.Intolerance on the part of moralityis a sign of man'sweakness:
he is frightened of his own "immorality," he mustdenyhis strongestinstincts,because he does not yet know how to use them. Thus the
most fruitful quarters of the globe remain uncultivated longest: the
power is lacking that might become master here....386.There are some very simple peoples and men who believe that continuous
fine weather would bea desirable thing: they still believe to-day
inrebus moralibus,that the "good man" alone and nothing else than
the "good man" is to be desired, and that the ultimate end of man's
evolution will be that only the good man will remain on earth (and that
it is only to that end that all efforts should be directed). This is
in the highest degree anuneconomicalthought; as we have already
suggested, it is the very acme of simplicity, and it is nothing more
than the expression of theagreeablenesswhich the "good man" creates
(he gives rise to no fear, he permits of relaxation, he gives what one
is able to take).With a more educated eye one learns to desire exactly the reverse—that
is to say, an ever greaterdominion of evil,man's gradual
emancipation from the narrow and aggravating bonds of morality, the
growth of power around the greatest forces of Nature, and the ability
to enlist the passions in one's service.387.The whole idea of the hierarchy of thepassions: as if the only right
and normal thing were to be led byreason—whereas the passions are
abnormal, dangerous, half-animal, and moreover, in so far as their end
is concerned, nothing more thandesires for pleasure....Passion is deprived of its dignity (1) as if it only manifested
itself in an unseemly way and were not necessary and always themotive force,(2) inasmuch as it is supposed to aim at no high
purpose—merely at pleasure....The misinterpretation of passion andreason,as if the latter were
an independent entity, and not a state of relationship between all
the various passions and desires; and as though every passion did not
possess its quantum of reason....388.How it was that, under the pressure of the dominion of an ascetic
andself-effacing morality,it was precisely the passions—love,
goodness, pity, even justice, generosity, and heroism, which were
necessarily misunderstood?It is therichness of a personality,the fullness of it, its power
to flow over and to bestow, its instinctive feeling of ease, and its
affirmative attitude towards itself, that creates great love and great
sacrifices: these passions proceed from strong and godlike personalism
as surely as do the desire to be master, to obtrude, and the inner
certainty that one has a right to everything. Theoppositeviews,
according to the most accepted notions, are indeed common views; and if
one does not stand firmly and bravely on one's legs, one has nothing to
give, and it is perfectly useless to stretch out one's hand either to
protect or to support others....How was it possible totransformthese instincts to such an extent
that man could feel that to be of value which is directed against
himself, so that he could sacrifice himself for another self! O thepsychological baseness and falseness which hitherto has laid down the
law in the Church and in Church-infected philosophy!If man is thoroughly sinful, then all he can do is to hate himself. As
a matter of fact, he ought not to regard even his fellows otherwise
than he does himself; the love of man requires a justification, and it
is found in the fact thatGod commanded it.—From this it follows
that all the natural instincts of man (to love, etc.) appear to him
to be, in themselves, prohibited; and that he re-acquires a right to
them only after havingdeniedthem as an obedient worshipper of God.
... Pascal, the admirablelogicianof Christianity,went as far as
this! let any one examine his relations to his sister. "Not to make
one's self loved," seemed Christian to him.389.Let us consider how dearly a moral canon such as this ("an ideal")
makes us pay. (Its enemies are—well? The "egoists.")The melancholy astuteness of self-abasement in Europe (Pascal,
La Rochefoucauld)—inner enfeeblement, discouragement, and
self-consumption of the non-gregarious man.The perpetual process of laying stress upon mediocre qualities as being
the most valuable (modesty in rank and file, Nature converted into an
instrument).Pangs of conscience associated with all thatis self-glorifying and
original: thus follows the unhappiness—thegloominessof the world
from the standpoint of stronger and better-constituted men!Gregarious consciousness and timorousness transferred to philosophy and
religion.Let us leave the psychological impossibility of a purely unselfish
action out of consideration!390.My ultimate conclusion is, that therealman represents a much
higher value than the "desirable" man of any ideal that has ever
existed hitherto; that all "desiderata" in regard to mankind have
been absurd and dangerous dissipations by means of which a particular
kind of man has sought to establishhismeasures of preservation
and of growth as a law for all; that every "desideratum" of this
kind which has been made to dominate hasreducedman's worth, his
strength, and his trust in the future; that the indigence and mediocre
intellectuality of man becomes most apparent, even to-day, when he
reveals adesire; that man's ability to fix values has hitherto been
developed too inadequately to do justice to the actual, not merely
to the "desirable,"worth of man; that, up to the present, ideals
have really been the power which has most slandered man and power, the
poisonous fumes which have hung over reality, and which haveseduced
men to yearn for nonentity....D.A Criticism of the Words: Improving, Perfecting, Elevating.391.The standardaccordingto which the value of moral valuations is to
be determined.The fundamental factthat has been overlooked: The contradiction
between "becoming more moral" and the elevation and the strengthening
of the type man.Homo natura: The "will to power."392.Moral values regarded asvalues of appearanceand compared withphysiologicalvalues.393.Reflecting upon generalities is always retrograde: the last of the
"desiderata" concerning men, for instance, have never been regarded as
problems by philosophers. They always postulate the "improvement"
of man, quite guilelessly, as though by means of some intuition they
had been helped over the note of interrogation following the question,whynecessarily "improve!" To what extent is itdesirablethat
man should be morevirtuous,or moreintelligent,orhappier!Granting that nobody yetknowsthe "wherefore?" of mankind, all
such desiderata have no sense whatever; and if one aspires to one
of them—who knows?—perhaps one is frustrating the other. Is an
increase of virtue compatible with an increase of intelligence and
insight?Dubito: only too often shall I have occasion to show that
the reverse is true. Has virtue, as an end, in the strict sense of the
word, not always been opposed to happiness hitherto? And again, does it
not require misfortune, abstinence, and self-castigation as a necessary
means? And if the aim were to arrive at thehighest insight,would
it not therefore be necessary to renounce all hope of an increase in
happiness, and to choose danger, adventure, mistrust, and seduction as
a road to enlightenment?... And suppose one will have happiness; maybe
one should join the ranks of the "poor in spirit."394.The wholesale deception and fraud of so-calledmoral improvement.We do not believe that one man can be another if he is not that
other already—that is to say, if he is not, as often happens, an
accretion of personalities or at least of parts of persons. In this
case it is possible to draw another set of actions from him into the
foreground, and to drive back "the older man." ... The man's aspect
is altered, butnothis actual nature.... It is but the merestfactum brutumthat any one should cease from performing certain
actions, and the fact allows of the most varied interpretations.
Neither does it always follow therefrom that the habit of performing
a certain action is entirely arrested,nor that the reasons for
that action are dissipated. He whose destiny and abilities make him
a criminal never unlearns anything, but is continually adding to his
store of knowledge: and long abstinence acts as a sort of tonic on
his talent.... Certainly, as far as society is concerned, the only
interesting fact is that some one has ceased from performing certain
actions; and to this end society will often raise a man out of those
circumstances which make himableto perform those actions: this
is obviously a wiser course than that of trying to break his destiny
and his particular nature. The Church,—which has done nothing except
to take the place of, and to appropriate, the philosophic treasures
of antiquity,—starting out from another standpoint and wishing to
secure a "soul" or the "salvation" of a soul, believes in the expiatory
power of punishment, as also in the obliterating power of forgiveness:
both of which supposed processes are deceptions due to religious
prejudice—punishment expiates nothing, forgiveness obliterates
nothing; what is done cannot be undone. Because some one forgets
something it by no means proves that something has been wiped out....
An action leads to certain consequences, both among men and away from
men, and it matters not whether it has met with punishment, or whether
it has been "expiated," "forgiven," or "obliterated," it matters not
even if the Church meanwhile canonises the man who performed it. The
Church believes in things that do not exist, it believes in "Souls"; it
believes in "influences" that do not exist—in divineinfluences; it
believes in states that do not exist, in sin, redemption, and spiritual
salvation: in all things it stops at the surface and is satisfied with
signs, attitudes, words, to which it lends an arbitrary interpretation.
It possesses a method of counterfeit psychology which is thought out
quite systematically.395."Illness makes men better," this famous assumption which is to be met
with in all ages, and in the mouth of the wizard quite as often as in
the mouth and maw of the people, really makes one ponder. In view of
discovering whether there is any truth in it, one might be allowed to
ask whether there is not perhaps a fundamental relationship between
morality and illness? Regarded as a whole, could not the "improvement
of mankind"—that is to say, the unquestionable softening, humanising,
and taming which the European has undergone within the last two
centuries—be regarded as the result of a long course of secret and
ghastly suffering, failure, abstinence, and grief? Has illness made
"Europeans" "better"? Or, put into other words, is not our modern
soft-hearted European morality, which could be likened to that of the
Chinese, perhaps an expression of physiologicaldeterioration?...
It cannot be denied, for instance, that wherever history shows us
"man" in a state of particular glory and power, his type is always
dangerous, impetuous, and boisterous, and careslittle for humanity;
and perhaps, in those cases in whichit seems otherwise,all that
was required was the courage or subtlety to see sufficiently below the
surface in psychological matters, in order even in them to discover the
general proposition: "the more healthy, strong, rich, fruitful, and
enterprising a man may feel, the more immoral he will be as well." A
terrible thought, to which one should on no account give way. Provided,
however, that one take a few steps forward with this thought, how
wondrous does the future then appear! What will then be paid for more
dearly on earth, than precisely this very thing which we are all trying
to promote, by all means in our power—the humanising, the improving,
and the increased "civilisation" of man? Nothing would then be more
expensive than virtue: for by means of it the world would ultimately
be turned into a hospital: and the last conclusion of wisdom would be,
"everybody must be everybody else's nurse." Then we should certainly
have attained to the "Peace on earth," so long desired! But how little
"joy we should find in each other's company"! How little beauty, wanton
spirits, daring, and danger! So few "actions" which would make life on
earth worth living! Ah! and no longer any "deeds"! But have not all thegreatthings and deeds which have remained fresh in the memory of
men, and which have not been destroyed by time, beenimmoralin the
deepest sense of the word?...396.The priests—and with them the half-priests or philosophers of all
ages—have always called that doctrine true, the educating influence
of which was a benevolent one or at least seemed so—that is to say,
tended to "improve." In this way they resemble an ingenuous plebeian
empiric and miracle-worker who, because he had tried a certain poison
as a cure, declared it to be no poison. "By their fruits ye shall know
them"—that is to say, "by our truths." This has been the reasoning
of priests until this day. They have squandered their sagacity, with
results that have been sufficiently fatal, in order to make the "proof
of power" (or the proof "by the fruits ") pre-eminent and even supreme
arbiter over all other forms of proof. "That which makes good must
be good; that which is good cannot lie"—these are their inexorable
conclusions—"that which bears good fruit must consequently be true;
there is no other criterion of truth." ...But to the extent to which "improving" acts as an argument,
deteriorating must also act as a refutation. The error can be shown to
be an error, by examining the lives of those who represent it: a false
step, a vice can refute.... This indecent form of opposition, which
comes from below and behind—the doglike kind of attack, has not died
out either. Priests, as psychologists, never discovered anything more
interesting than spying out the secret vices of their adversaries—they
prove Christianity by looking about for the world'sfilth. They apply
this principle more particularly to the greatest on earth, to the
geniuses: readers will remember how Goethe has been attacked on every
conceivable occasion in Germany (Klopstock and Herder were among the
first to give a "good example" in this respect—birds of a feather
flock together).397.One must be very immoral in order tomake people moral by deeds.The
moralist's means are the most terrible that have ever been used; he
who has not the courage to be an immoralist in deeds may be fit for
anything else, but not for the duties of a moralist.Morality is a menagerie; it assumes that iron bars may be more useful
than freedom, even for the creatures it imprisons; it also assumes that
there are animal-tamers about who do not shrink from terrible means,
and who are acquainted with the use of red-hot iron. This terrible
species, which enters into a struggle with the wild animal, is called
"priests."***Man, incarcerated in an iron cage of errors, has become a caricature
of man; he is sick, emaciated, ill-disposed towards himself, filled
with a loathing of the impulses of life, filled with a mistrust of
all that is beautiful and happy in life—in fact, he is a wandering
monument of misery. How shall we ever succeed in vindicating thisphenomenon—this artificial, arbitrary, andrecentmiscarriage—the
sinner—which the priests have bred on their territory?***In order to think fairly of morality, we must put twobiologicalnotions in its place: thetamingof the wild beasts, and therearing
of a particular species.The priests of all ages have always pretended that they wished to
"improve" ... But we, of another persuasion, would laugh if a
lion-tamer ever wished to speak to us of his "improved" animals. As a
rule, the taming of a beast is only achieved by deteriorating it: even
the moral man is not a better man; he is rather a weaker member of his
species. But he is less harmful....398.What I want to make clear, with all the means in my power, is:—(a)That there is no worse confusion than that which confoundsrearingandtaming: and these two things have always been
confused.... Rearing, as I understand it, is a means of husbanding
the enormous powers of humanity in such a way that whole generations
may build upon the foundations laid by their progenitors—not only
outwardly, but inwardly, organically, developing from the already
existing stem and growingstronger....(b)That there is an exceptional danger in believing that mankind as
a whole is developingand growing stronger, if individuals are seen
to grow more feeble and more equally mediocre. Humanity—mankind—is
an abstract thing: the object ofrearing,even in regard to the most
individual cases, can only be thestrongman (the man who has no
breeding is weak, dissipated, and unstable).6. Concluding Remarks Concerning the Criticism of Morality.399.These are the things I demand of you—however badly they may sound in
your ears: that you subject moral valuations themselves to criticism.
That you should put a stop to your instinctive moral impulse—which in
this case demands submission and not criticism—with the question: "why
precisely submission?" That this yearning for a "why?"—for a criticism
of morality should not only be your present form of morality, but the
sublimest of all moralities, and an honour to the age you live in. That
your honesty, your will, may give an account of itself, and not deceive
you: "why not?"—Before what tribunal?400.The threepostulates:—All that is ignoble is high (the protest of the "vulgar
man").All that is contrary to Nature is high (the protest of the
physiologically botched).All that is of average worth is high (the protest of the
herd, of the "mediocre").Thus in thehistory of moralityawill to powerfinds expression,
by means of which, either the slaves, the oppressed, the bungled and
the botched, those that suffer from themselves, or the mediocre,
attempt to make those valuations prevail which favourtheirexistence.From a biological standpoint, therefore, the phenomenon Morality is of
a highly suspicious nature. Up to the present, morality has developed
at thecostof: the ruling classes and their specific instincts,
the well-constituted andbeautifulnatures, the independent and
privileged classes in all respects.Morality, then, is a sort of counter-movement opposing Nature's
endeavours to arrive at ahigher type.Its effects are: mistrust of
life in general (in so far as its tendencies are felt to be immoral),
—hostility towards the senses (inasmuch as the highest values are
felt to be opposed to the higher instincts),—Degeneration and
self-destruction of "higher natures," because it is precisely in them
that the conflict becomesconscious.401.Which values have been paramount hitherto?Morality as the leading value in all phases of philosophy (even with
the Sceptics). Result: this world is no good, a "true world" must exist
somewhere.What is it that here determines the highestvalue? What, in sooth,
is morality? The instinct of decadence; it is the exhausted and
the disinherited whotake their revengein this way and play themasters....Historical proof: philosophers have always been decadents and always in
the pay of Nihilistic religions.The instinct of decadence appears as the will to power. The
introduction of its system of means: its means are absolutely immoral.General aspect: the values that have been highest hitherto have been a
special instance of the will to power; morality itself is a particular
instance ofimmorality.***Why the Antagonistic Values always succumbed.1. How was this actuallypossible!Question: why did life and
physiological well-constitutedness succumb everywhere? Why was there no
affirmative philosophy, no affirmative religion?The historical signs of such movements: the pagan religion.
Dionysosversusthe Christ. The Renaissance. Art.2. The strong and the weak: the healthy and the sick; the exception and
the rule. There is no doubt as to who is the stronger....General view of history; Is man anexceptionin the history of life
on this account?—An objection toDarwinism.The means wherewith
the weak succeed in ruling have become: instincts, "humanity,"
"institutions." ...3. The proof of this rule on the part of theweak is to be found in
our political instincts, in our social values, in our arts, and in ourscience.***Theinstincts of decadencehave become master of theinstincts of
ascendinglife.... Thewill to nonentityhas prevailed over thewill to life!Is thistrue? is there not perhaps a stronger guarantee of life and
of the species in this victory of the weak and the mediocre?—is it
not perhaps only a means in the collective movement of life, a mere
slackening of the pace, a protective measure against something even
more dangerous?Suppose thestrongwere masters in all respects, even in valuing:
let us try and think what their attitude would be towards illness,
suffering, and sacrifice!Self-contempt on the part of the weakwould
be the result: they would do their utmost to disappear and to extirpate
their kind. And would this bedesirable?—should we really like a
world in which the subtlety, the consideration, the intellectuality,
theplasticity—in fact, the whole influence of the weak—was
lacking?[9]...We have seen two "wills to power" at war(in this special case we
had a principle: that of agreeing with the one that has hitherto
succumbed, and of disagreeing with the one that has hitherto
triumphed): we have recognised the "real world" as a "world of lies"
and morality as aform of immorality.We donotsay "the stronger
is wrong."We have understoodwhatit is that has determined the highest values
hitherto, andwhythe latter should have prevailed over the opposite
value: it was numerically thestronger.If we now purifythe opposite valueof the infection, the
half-heartedness,and the degeneration,with which we identify it, we
restore Nature to the throne, free from moralic acid.[9]TRANSLATOR'S NOTE.—We realise here the great difference
between Nietzsche and those who draw premature conclusions from
Darwinism. There is no brutal solution of modern problems in
Nietzsche's philosophy. He did not advocate anything so ridiculous as
the total suppression of the weak and the degenerate. What he wished to
resist and to overthrowwas their supremacy, their excessive power.He felt that there was a desirable and stronger type which was in need
of having its hopes, aspirations, and instincts upheld in defiance of
Christian values.402.Morality,a useful error; or, more clearly still, a necessary and
expedient lie according to the greatest and most impartial of its
supporters.403.One ought to be able to acknowledge the truth up to that point where
one is sufficiently elevated no longer to require thedisciplinary
school of moral error.—When one judges life morally, itdisgustsone.Neither should false personalities be invented; one should not say, for
instance, "Nature is cruel." It is precisely when oneperceivesthat
there is no such central controlling and responsible force that one is
relieved!Evolution of man.A. He tried to attain to a certain power
over Nature and over himself. (Morality was necessary in
order to make man triumph in his struggle with Nature and
"wild animals.")B. If power over Nature has been attained, this power can
be used as a help in our development: Will to Power as a
self-enhancing and self-strengthening principle.404.Morality may be regarded as theillusion of a species,fostered with
the view of urging the individual to sacrifice himself to the future,
and seemingly granting him such a very great value, that with thatself-consciousnesshe may tyrannise over, and constrain, other sides
of his nature, and find it difficult to be pleased with himself.We ought to be most profoundly thankful for what morality has done
hitherto:but now it is no more than a burdenwhich may prove fatal.Morality itselfin the form of honesty urges us to deny morality.405.To what extent is theself-destruction of moralitystill a sign of
its own strength? We Europeans have within us the blood of those who
were ready to die for their faith; we have taken moralityfrightfully
seriously, and there is nothing which we have not, at one time,
sacrificed to it. On the other hand, our intellectual subtlety has
been reached essentially through the vivisection of our consciences.
We do not yet know the "whither" towards which we are urging our
steps, now that we have departed from the soil of our forebears. But
it was on this very soil that we acquired the strength which is now
driving us from our homes in search of adventure, and it is thanks
to that strength that we are now in mid-sea, surrounded by untried
possibilities and things undiscovered—we can no longer choose, we must
be conquerors, now that we have no land in which we feel at home and
in which we would fain "survive." A concealed "yea" is driving us
forward, and it is stronger than all our "nays." Even ourstrengthno
longer bears with us in the old swampy land: we venture out into the
open, we attempt the task. The world is still rich and undiscovered,
and even to perish were better than to be half-men or poisonous men.
Our very strength itself urges us to take to the sea; there where all
suns have hitherto sunk we know of a new world....III.CRITICISM OF PHILOSOPHY.1. General Remarks.406.Let us rid ourselves of a few superstitions which heretofore have been
fashionable among philosophers!407.Philosophers are prejudicedagainstappearance, change, pain, death,
the things of the body, the senses, fate, bondage, and all that which
has no purpose.In the first place, they believe in: absolute knowledge, (2) in
knowledge for its own sake,(3) in virtue and happiness as necessarily related,(4) in the recognisability of men's acts. They are led by instinctive
determinations of values, in whichformercultures are reflected
(more dangerous cultures too).408.What have philosopherslacked! (1) A sense of history, (2) a
knowledge of physiology, (3) agoal in the future.—The ability to
criticise without irony or moral condemnation.409.Philosophers have had (1) from times immemorial a wonderful capacity
for thecontradictio in adjecto,(2) they have always trusted
concepts as unconditionally as they have mistrusted the senses: it
never seems to have occurred to them that notions and words are our
inheritance of past ages in which thinking was neither very clear nor
very exact.What seems to dawn upon philosophers last of all: that they must
no longer allow themselves to be presented with concepts already
conceived, nor must they merely purify and polish up those concepts;
but they must firstmakethem,createthem, themselves, and
then present them and get people to accept them. Up to the present,
people have trusted their concepts generally, as if they had been a
wonderfuldowryfrom some kind of wonderland: but they constitute
the inheritance of our most remote, most foolish, and most intelligent
forefathers. Thispietytowards thatwhich already exists in usis perhaps related to themoral element in science.What we needed
above all is absolute scepticism towards all traditional concepts (like
that which a certain philosopher may already have possessed—and he was
Plato, of course: for he taughtthe reverse).410.Profoundly mistrustful towards the dogmas of the theory of knowledge,
I liked to look now out of this window, now out of that, though I took
good care not to become finally fixed anywhere, indeed I should have
thought it dangerous to have done so—though finally: is it within the
range of probabilities for an instrument to criticise its own fitness?
What I noticed more particularly was, that no scientific scepticism or
dogmatism has ever arisen quite free from allarrières pensées—that
it has only a secondary value as soon as the motive lying immediately
behind it is discovered.Fundamental aspect: Kant's, Hegel's, Schopenhauer's, the sceptical and
epochistical, the historifying and the pessimistic attitudes—all have
amoralorigin. I have found no one who has dared tocriticise the
moral valuations,and I soon turned my back upon the meagre attempts
that have been made to describe the evolution of these feelings (by
English and German Darwinians).How can Spinoza's position, his denial and repudiation of the moral
values, be explained? (It was the result of his Theodicy!)411.Morality regarded as the highest form of protection.—Our world iseitherthe work and expression (themodus) of God, in which case
it must bein the highest degree perfect(Leibnitz'sconclusion
...),—and no one doubted that he knew what perfection must be
like,—and then all evil can only beapparent(Spinoza ismore
radical,he says this of good and evil), or it must be a part of God's
high purpose (a consequence of a particularly great mark of favour
on God's part, who thus allows man to choose between good and evil:
the privilege of being no automaton; "freedom," with the ever-present
danger of making a mistake and of choosing wrongly.... See Simplicius,
for instance, in the commentary to Epictetus).Orour world is imperfect; evil and guilt are real, determined, and
are absolutely inherent to its being; in that case it cannot be therealworld: consequently knowledge can only be a way of denying
the world, for the latter is error which may be recognised as such.
This is Schopenhauer's opinion, based upon Kantian first principles.
Pascal was still more desperate: he thought that even knowledge must be
corrupt and false—thatrevelationis a necessity if only in order to
recognise that the world should be denied....412.Owing to our habit of believing in unconditional authorities, we have
grown to feel a profound need for them: indeed, this feeling is so
strong that, even in an age of criticism such as Kant's was, it showed
itself to be superior to the need for criticism, and, in a certain
sense, was able to subject the whole work of critical acumen, and to
convert it to its own use. It proved itssuperiority once more in
the generation which followed, and which, owing to its historical
instincts, naturally felt itself drawn to a relative view of all
authority, when it converted even the Hegelian philosophy of evolution
(history rechristened and called philosophy) to its own use, and
represented history as being the self-revelation and self-surpassing
of moral ideas. Since Plato, philosophy has lain under the dominion of
morality. Even in Plato's predecessors, moral interpretations play a
most important rôle (Anaximander declares that all things are made to
perish as a punishment for their departure from pure being; Heraclitus
thinks that the regularity of phenomena is a proof of the morally
correct character of evolution in general).413.The progress of philosophy has been hindered most seriously hitherto
through the influence of moralarrières-pensées.414.In all ages, "fine feelings" have been regarded as arguments, "heaving
breasts" have been the bellows of godliness, convictions have been the
"criteria" of truth, and the need of opposition has been the note of
interrogation affixed to wisdom. This falseness and fraud permeates
the whole history of philosophy. But for a few respected sceptics,
no instinct for intellectual Uprightness is to be found anywhere.
Finally,Kantguilelessly sought to make this thinker's corruption
scientific by means of his concept, "practical reason". He expressly
invented a reason which, in certain cases, would allow onenotto
bother about reason—that is to say, in cases where the heart's desire,
morality, or "duty" are the motive power.415.Hegel: his popular side, the doctrine of war and of great men. Right
is on the side of the victorious: he (the victorious man) stands for
the progress of mankind. His is an attempt at proving the dominion of
morality by means of history.Kant: a kingdom of moral values withdrawn from us, invisible, real.Hegel: a demonstrable process of evolution, the actualisation of the
kingdom of morality.We shall not allow ourselves to be deceived either in Kant's or Hegel's
way:—We no longerbelieve,as they did, in morality, and therefore
have no philosophies to found with the view of justifying morality.
Criticism and history have no charm for usin thisrespect: what is
their charm, then?416.The importance of German philosophy (Hegel,) the thinking out of a
kind ofpantheismwhich would not reckon evil, error, and suffering
as arguments against godliness.This grand initiativewas misused
by the powers that were (State,etc.) to sanction the rights of the
people that happened to be paramount.Schopenhauerappears as a stubborn opponent of this idea; he is a
moral man who, in order to keep in the right concerning his moral
valuation, finally becomes adenier of the world.Ultimately he
becomes a "mystic."I myself have sought anæstheticjustification of the ugliness in
this world. I regarded the desire for beauty and for the persistence
of certain forms as a temporary preservative and recuperative measure:
what seemed to me to be fundamentally associated with pain, however,
was the eternal lust of creating and theeternal compulsion to
destroy.We call things ugly when we look at them with the desire of attributing
some sense, somenewsense, to what has become senseless: it is the
accumulated power of the creator which compels him to regard what has
existed hitherto as no longer acceptable, botched, worthy of being
suppressed—ugly!417.My first solution of the problem: Dionysian wisdom. The joy in the
destruction of the most noble thing,and at the sight of its gradual
undoing, regarded as the joy over what iscoming and what lies in the
future,which triumphs overactual things, however good they may
be.Dionysian: temporary identification with the principle of life
(voluptuousness of the martyr included).My innovations.The Development of Pessimism:intellectual
pessimism;moralcriticism, the dissolution of the last comfort.
Knowledge, a sign ofdecay,veils by means of an illusion all strong
action; isolated culture is unfair and therefore strong.(1) Myfightagainst decay and the increasing weakness of
personality. I sought a newcentrum.(2) The impossibility of this endeavour isrecognised.(3)I therefore travelled farther along the road of dissolution—and
along it I found new sources of strength for individuals.Wemust
be destroyers!—I perceived that the state ofdissolution is one
in which individual beings are able to arrive at a kind of perfection
not possible hitherto, it is an image and isolated example of life
in general.To the paralysing feeling of general dissolution and
imperfection, I opposed theEternal Recurrence.418.People naturally seek the picture of life inthatphilosophy which
makes them most cheerful—that is to say, in that philosophy which
gives the highest sense of freedom totheir strongest instinct.This
is probably the case with me.419.German philosophy, as a whole,—Leibnitz, Kant, Hegel, Schopenhauer, to
mention the greatest,—is the most out-and-outform ofromanticismand home-sickness that has ever yet existed: it is a yearning for the
best that has ever been known on earth. One is at home nowhere; that
which is ultimately yearned after is a place where one can somehow
feel at home; because one has been at home there before, and that
place is theGreekworld! But it is precisely in that direction
that airbridges are broken down—save,of course, the rainbow
of concepts! And the latter lead everywhere, to all the homes and
"fatherlands" that ever existed for Greek souls! Certainly, one must be
very light and thin in order to cross these bridges! But what happiness
lies even in this desire for spirituality, almost for ghostliness!
With it, how far one is from the "press and bustle" and the mechanical
boorishness of the natural sciences, how far from the vulgar din
of "modern ideas"! One wants to get back to the Greeksviathe
Fathers of the Church, from North to South, from formulæ to forms; the
passage out of antiquity—Christianity—is still a source of joy as a
means of access to antiquity, as a portion of the old world itself,
as a glistening mosaic of ancient concepts and ancient valuations.
Arabesques, scroll-work, rococo of scholastic abstractions—always
better, that is to say, finer and more slender, than the peasant and
plebeian reality of Northern Europe, and still a protest on the part
of higher intellectuality against the peasant war and insurrection
of the mob which have become master of the intellectual taste of
Northern Europe, and which had its leader in a man as great and
unintellectual as Luther:—inthis respect German philosophy belongs
to the Counter-Reformation, it might even be looked upon as related
to the Renaissance, or at least to the will to Renaissance, the will
to get ahead with the discovery of antiquity, with the excavation of
ancient philosophy, and above all of pre-Socratic philosophy—the
most thoroughly dilapidated of all Greek temples! Possibly, in à few
hundred years, people will be of the opinion that all German philosophy
derived its dignity from this fact, that step by step it attempted
to reclaim the soil of antiquity, and that therefore all demands for
"originality" must appear both petty and foolish when compared with
Germany's higher claim to having refastened the bonds which seemed for
ever rent—the bonds which bound us to the Greeks, the highest type
of "men" ever evolved hitherto. To-day we are once more approaching
all the fundamental principles of the cosmogony which the Greek mind
in Anaximander, Heraclitus, Parmenides, Empedocles, Democritus, and
Anaxagoras, was responsible for. Day by day we are growing moreGreek; at first, as is only natural, the change remains confined to
concepts and valuations, and we hover around like Greasing spirits: but
it is to be hoped that some day ourbodywill also be involved! Here
lies (and has always lain) my hope for the German nation.420.I do not wish to convert anybody to philosophy: it is both necessary
and perhaps desirable that thephilosopher should be arareplant. Nothing is more repugnant to me than the scholarly praise of
philosophy which is to be found in Seneca and Cicero. Philosophy
has not much in common with virtue. I trust I may be allowed to say
that even the scientific man is a fundamentally different person
from the philosopher. What I most desire is, that the genuine notion
"philosopher" should not completely perish in Germany. There are so
many incomplete creatures in Germany already who would fain conceal
their ineptitude beneath such noble names.421.I mustset up the highest ideal of a philosopher.Learning is not
everything! The scholar is the sheep in the kingdom of learning; he
studies because he is told to do so, and because others have done so
before him.422.The superstition concerningphilosophers: They are confounded with
menof science.As if the value of things were inherent in them
and required only to be held on to tightly! To what extent are their
researches carried on under the influence of values which already
prevail (their hatred of appearance of the body, etc.)? Schopenhauer
concerning morality (scorn of Utilitarianism). Ultimately the confusion
goes so far that Darwinism is regarded as philosophy, and thus at the
present day power has gone over to the men ofscience.Even Frenchmen
like Taine prosecuteresearch, or mean to prosecute research,withoutbeing already in possession of a standard of valuation.
Prostration before "facts" of a kind of cult. As a matter of fact, theydestroythe existing valuations.Theexplanationof this misunderstanding. The man who is able to
command is a rare phenomenon; he misinterprets himself. What onewantsto do, above all, is to disclaim all authority and to attribute
it tocircumstances.In Germany the critic's estimations belong to
the history of awakeningmanhood.Lessing, etc. (Napoleon concerning
Goethe). As a matter of fact, the movement is again made retrograde
owing to German romanticism: and thefameof German philosophy
relies upon it as if it dissipated the danger of scepticism and coulddemonstrate faith.Both tendencies culminate in Hegel: at bottom,
what he did was to generalise the fact of German criticism and the
fact of German romanticism,—a kind of dialectical fatalism, but to
the honour of intellectuality, with the actual submission of the
philosopher to reality.The critic prepares the way: that is all!With Schopenhauer the philosopher's mission dawns; it is felt that
the object is to determinevalues; still under the dominion of
eudemonism. The ideal of Pessimism.423.Theory and practice.—This is a pernicious distinction, as if there
were aninstinct of knowledge,which, without inquiring into the
utility or harmfulness of a thing, blindly charged at the truth; and
then that, apart from this instinct, there were the whole world ofpracticalinterests.In contradiction of this, I try to show what instincts are active
behind all thesepuretheorists,—and how the latter, as a whole,
under the dominion of their instincts, fatally make for something
whichto their mindsis "truth," to their minds andonlyto their
minds. The struggle between systems, together with the struggle between
epistemological scruples, is one which involves very special instincts
(forms of vitality, of decline, of classes, of races, etc.).The so-calledthirst for knowledgemay be traced to thelust of
appropriationand ofconquest: in obedience to this lust the
senses, memory, and the instincts, etc., were developed. The quickest
possible reduction of the phenomena, economy, the accumulation of spoil
from the world of knowledge (i.e.that portion of the world which has
been appropriated and made manageable)....Morality is therefore such a curious science, because it is in the
highest degreepractical: the purely scientific position, scientific
uprightness, is thus immediately abandoned, as soon as morality calls
for replies to its questions. Morality says: Irequirecertain
answers—reasons, arguments; scruples may come afterwards, or they may
not come at all."How must one act?" If one considers that one is dealing with a
supremely evolved type—a type which has been "dealt with" for
countless thousands of years, and in which everything has become
instinct, expediency, automatism, fatality, theurgencyof this moral
question seems rather funny."How must one act?" Morality has always been a subject of
misunderstanding: as a matter of fact, a certain species, which was
constituted to act in a certain way, wished to justify itself bymakingits norm paramount."How must one act?" this is not a cause, but aneffect.Morality
follows, the ideal comes first....On the other hand, the appearance of moral scruples (or in other
words,the coming to consciousness of the valueswhich guide action)
betray a certainmorbidness; strong ages and people do not ponder
over their rights, nor over the principles of action, over instinct or
over reason.Consciousnessis a sign that the real morality—that
is to say, the certainty of instinct which leads to a definite
course of action—is going to the dogs.... Every time a newworld
of consciousnessis created, the moralists are signs of a lesion,
of impoverishment and of disorganisation. Those who aredeeply
instinctivefear bandying words over duties: among them are found
pyrrhonic opponents of dialectics and of knowableness in general.... A
virtue isrefutedwith a "for." ...Thesis: The appearance of moralists belongs to periods when morality
is declining.Thesis: The moralist is a dissipator of moral instincts, however much
he may appear to be their restorer.Thesis: That which really prompts the action of a moralist is not a
moral instinct, but theinstincts of decadence,translated into the
forms of morality (he regards the growing uncertainty of the instincts
ascorruption).Thesis: Theinstincts of decadencewhich, thanks to moralists, wish
to become master of the instinctive morality of stronger races and
ages, are:—(1) The instincts of the weak and of the botched;(2) The instincts of the exceptions, of the anchorites, of the
unhinged, of the abortions of quality or of the reverse;(3) The instincts of the habitually suffering, who require a noble
interpretation of their condition, and who therefore require to be as
poor physiologists as possible.424.The humbug of thescientific spirit.—One should not affect the
spirit of science, when the time to be scientific is not yet at
hand; but even the genuine investigator has to abandon vanity, and
has to affect a certain kind of method which is not yet seasonable.
Neither should we falsify things and thoughts, which we have arrived
at differently, by means of a false arrangement of deduction and
dialectics. It is thus that Kant in his "morality" falsifies his
inner tendency to psychology; a more modern example of the same thing
is Herbert Spencer'sEthics.A man should neither conceal nor
misrepresent thefactsconcerning the way in which he conceived histhoughts. The deepest and most inexhaustible books will certainly
always have something of the aphoristic and impetuous character of
Pascal'sPensées. The motive forces and valuations have lain long
below the surface; that which comes uppermost is their effect.I guard against all the humbug of a false scientific spirit:—(1) In respect of the manner ofdemonstration,if it does not
correspond to the genesis of the thoughts;(2) In respect of the demands formethodswhich, at a given period in
science, may be quite impossible;(3) In respect of the demand forobjectivityfor cold impersonal
treatment, where, as in the case of all valuations, we describe
ourselves and our intimate experiences in a couple of words. There
are ludicrous forms of vanity, as, for instance, Sainte-Beuve's. He
actually worried himself all his life because he had shown some warmth
or passion either "pro" or "con," and he would fein have lied that
fact out of his life.425."Objectivity" in the philosopher: moral indifference in regard to one's
self, blindness in regard to either favourable or fetal circumstances.
Unscrupulousness in the use of dangerous means; perversity and
complexity of character considered as an advantage and exploited.My profound indifference to myself: I refuseto derive any advantage
from my knowledge, nor do I wish to escape any disadvantages which it
may entail.—I include among these disadvantages that which is called
theperversionof character; this prospect is beside the point: I use
my character, but I try neither to understand it nor to change it—the
personal calculation of virtue has not entered my head once. It strikes
me that one closes the doors of knowledge as soon as one becomes
interested in one's own personal case—or even in the "Salvation of
one's soul"!... One should not take one's morality too seriously, nor
should one forfeit a modest right to the opposite of morality....A sort ofheritage of moralityis perhaps presupposed here: one
feels that one can be lavish with it and fling a great deal of it out
of the window without materially reducing one's means. One is never
tempted to admire "beautiful souls," one always knows one's self to be
their superior. The monsters of virtue should be met with inner scorn;déniaiser la vertu—Oh, the joy of it!One should revolve round one's self, have no desire to be "better" or
"anything else" at all than one is. One should be too interested to
omit throwing the tentacles or meshes of every morality out to things.426.Concerning the psychology ofphilosophers.They should be
psychologists—this was possible only from the nineteenth century
onwards—and no longer little Jack Homers, who see three or fourfeet in front of them, and are almost satisfied to burrow inside
themselves. We psychologists of the future are not very intent on
self-contemplation: we regard it almost as a sign of degeneration when
an instrument endeavours "to know itself":[10]we are instruments of
knowledge and we would fain possess all the precision and ingenuousness
of an instrument—consequently we may not analyse or "know" ourselves.
The first sign of a great psychologist's self-preservative instinct:
he never goes in search of himself, he has no eye, no interest, no
inquisitiveness where he himself is concerned.... The great egoism
of our dominating will insists on our completely shutting our eyes to
ourselves, and on our appearing "impersonal," "disinterested"!—Oh to
what a ridiculous degree we are the reverse of this!We are no Pascals, we are not particularly interested in the
"Salvation of the soul," in our own happiness, and in our own
virtue.—We have neither enough time nor enough curiosity to be so
concerned with ourselves. Regarded more deeply, the case is again
different, we thoroughly mistrust all men who thus contemplate their
own navels: because introspection seems to us a degenerate form of
the psychologist's genius, as a note of interrogation affixed to the
psychologist's instinct: just as a painter's eye is degenerate which is
actuated by thewillto see for the sake of seeing.