[10]TRANSLATOR'S NOTE.—Goethe invariably inveighed against
the "gnoti seauton" of the Socratic school; he was of the opinion that
an animal which tries to see its inner self must be sick.2. A Criticism of Greek Philosophy.427.The apparition of Greek philosophers since the time of Socrates is a
symptom of decadence; the anti-Hellenic instincts become paramount.The "Sophist" is still quite Hellenic—as are also Anaxagoras,
Democritus, and the great Ionians; but only as transitional forms. Thepolisloses its faith in the unity of its culture, in its rights of
dominion over every otherpolis....Cultures, that is to say, "the
gods," are exchanged, and thus the belief in the exclusive prerogative
of thedeus autochthonusis lost. Good and Evil of whatever origin
get mixed: the boundaries separating good from evil graduallyvanish....This is the "Sophist." ...On the other hand, the "philosopher" is thereactionary: he insists
upon theoldvirtues. He sees the reason of decay in the decay of
institutions: he therefore wishes to reviveoldinstitutions;—he
sees decay in the decline of authority: he therefore endeavours to
findnewauthorities (he travels abroad, explores foreign literature
and exotic religions....);—he will reinstate theideal polis,after
the concept "polis" has become superannuated (just, as the Jews kept
themselves together as a "people" after they had fallen into slavery).
They become interested in all tyrants: their desire is to re-establish
virtue with "force majeure".Gradually everythinggenuinely Hellenicis held responsible for
the state ofdecay(and Plato is just as ungrateful to Pericles,
Homer, tragedy, and rhetoric as the prophets are to David and
Saul).The downfall of Greece is conceived as an objection to the
fundamental principles of Hellenic culture: the profound error of
philosophers—Conclusion: the Greek world perishes. The cause thereof:
Homer, mythology, ancient morality, etc.The anti-Hellenic development of philosophers' valuations:—the
Egyptian influence ("Life after death" made into law....);—the Semitic
influence (the "dignity of the sage," the "Sheik");—the Pythagorean
influence, the subterranean cults, Silence, means of terrorisation
consisting of appeals to a "Beyond,"mathematics: the religious
valuation consisting of a sort of intimacy with a cosmic entity;—the
sacerdotal, ascetic, and transcendental influences;—thedialecticalinfluence,—I am of opinion that even Plato already betrays revolting
and pedantic meticulousness in his concepts!—Decline of good
intellectual taste: the hateful noisiness of every kind of direct
dialectics seems no longer to be felt.Thetwodecadent tendencies and extremes run side by side: (a) the
luxuriant and more charming kind of decadence which shows a love of
pomp and art, and (b) the gloomy kind, with its religious and moral
pathos, its stoical self-hardening tendency, its Platonic denial of the
senses, and its preparation of the soil for the coming of Christianity.428.To what extent psychologists have been corrupted by the moral
idiosyncrasy!—Not one of the ancient philosophers had the courage to
advance the theory of the non-free will (that is to say, the theory
that denies morality);—not one had the courage to identify the typical
feature of happiness, of every kind of happiness **("pleasure"), with the
will to power: for the pleasure of power was considered immoral;—not
one had the courage to regard virtue as aresult of immorality(as a
result of a will to power) in the service of a species (or of a race,
or of apolis); for the will to power was considered immoral.In the whole of moral evolution, there is no sign of truth: all
the conceptual elements which come into play are fictions; all the
psychological tenets are false; all the forms of logic employed in this
department of prevarication are sophisms. The chief feature of all
moral philosophers is their total lack of intellectual cleanliness and
self-control: they regard "fine feelings" as arguments: their heaving
breasts seem to them the bellows of godliness.... Moral philosophy is
the most suspicious period in the history of the human intellect.The first great example: in the name of morality and under its
patronage, a great wrong was committed, which as a matter of fact was
in every respect an act of decadence. Sufficient stress cannot be laid
upon this fact, that the great Greek philosophers not only representedthe decadence ofevery kind of Greek ability, but also made itcontagious.... This "virtue" made wholly abstract was the highest
form of seduction; to make oneself abstract means to turn one's back on
the world.The moment is a very remarkable one: the Sophists are within sight
of the firstcriticism of morality,the firstknowledgeof
morality:—they classify the majority of moral valuations (in view
of their dependence upon local conditions) together;—they lead one
to understand that every form of morality is capable of being upheld
dialectically: that is to say, they guessed that all the fundamental
principles of a morality must besophistical—a proposition which
was afterwards proved in the grandest possible style by the ancient
philosophers from Plato onwards (up to Kant);—they postulate the
primary truth that there is no such thing as a "moralper se," a
"goodper se," and that it is madness to talk of "truth" in this
respect.Wherever wasintellectual uprightnessto be found in those days?The Greek culture of the Sophists had grown out of all the Greek
instincts; it belongs to the culture of the age of Pericles as
necessarily as Plato does not: it has its predecessors in Heraclitus,
Democritus, and in the scientific types of the old philosophy; it
finds expression in the elevated culture of Thucydides, for instance.
And—it has ultimately shown itself to be right: every step in the
science of epistemology and morality hasconfirmed the attitudeof
the Sophists.... Ourmodern attitude of mind is, to a great extent,
Heraclitean, Democritean, and Protagorean ... to say that it isProtagoreanis even sufficient: because Protagoras was in himself a
synthesis of the two men Heraclitus and Democritus.(Plato: agreat Cagliostro,—let us think of how Epicurus judged
him; how Timon, Pyrrho's friend, judged him——Is Plato's integrity by
any chance beyond question?... But we at least know what he wished to
havetaughtas absolute truth—namely, things which were to him not
even relative truths: the separate and immortal life of "souls.")429.TheSophistsare nothing more, nor less than realists: they elevate
all the values and practices which are common property to the rank of
values—they have the courage, peculiar to all strong intellects,
which consists inknowingtheir immorality....Is it to be supposed that these small Greek independent republics,
so filled with rage and envy that they would fain have devoured each
other, were led by principles of humanity and honesty? Is Thucydides
by any chance reproached with the words he puts into the mouths of
the Athenian ambassadors when they were treating with the Melii anent
the question of destruction or submission? Only the most perfect
Tartuffes could have been able to speak of virtue in the midst of that
dreadful strain—or if not Tartuffes, at leastdetached philosophers,anchorites, exiles, and fleersfrom reality.... All of them, people
who denied things in order to be able to exist.The Sophists were Greeks: when Socrates and Plato adopted the cause
of virtue and justice, they wereJewsor I know not what.Grote'stactics in the defence of the Sophists are false: he would like to
raise them to the rank of men of honour and moralisers—but it was
their honour not to indulge in any humbug with grand words and virtues.430.The great reasonableness underlying all moral education lay in the fact
that it always attempted to attain tothe certainty of an instinct:
so that neither good intentions nor good means, as such, first required
to enter consciousness. Just as the soldier learns his exercises, so
should man learn how to act in life. In truth this unconsciousness
belongs to every kind of perfection: even the mathematician carries out
his calculations unconsciously....What, then, does Socrates'reactionmean, which recommended
dialectics as the way to virtue, and which was charmed when morality
was unable to justify itself logically? But this is precisely what
proves itssuperiority—without unconsciousnessit is worth nothing!In reality it meansthe dissolution of Greek instincts,whendemonstrabilityis posited as the first condition of personal
excellence in virtue. All these great "men of virtue" and of words are
themselves types of dissolution.In practice, it means that moral judgments have been torn from the
conditions among which they grew and in which alone they had some
sense, from their Greek and Græco-political soil, in order to bedenaturalisedunder the cover of beingmade sublime.The great
concepts "good" and "just" are divorced from the first principles of
which they form a part, and, as "ideas"become free,degenerate
into subjects for discussion. A certain truth is sought behind them;
they are regarded as entities or as symbols of entities: a world isinventedwhere they are "at home," and from which they are supposed
to hail.In short: the scandal reaches its apotheosis in Plato.... And then it
was necessary to invent theperfectly abstractman also:—good, just,
wise, and a dialectician to boot—in short, thescarecrowof the
ancient philosopher: a plant without any soil whatsoever; a human race
devoid of all definite ruling instincts; a virtue which "justifies"
itself with reasons. The perfectly absurd "individual"per se! the
highest form ofArtificiality....Briefly, the denaturalisation of moral values resulted in the creation
of a degeneratetype of man—"the good man," "the happy man,"
"the wise man."—Socrates represents a moment of the mostprofound
perversityin the history of values.431.Socrates.—This veering round of Greek taste in favour of dialectics
is a great question. Whatreally happened then? Socrates, theroturierwho was responsible for it, was thus able to triumph over
a more noble taste, the taste ofthe noble:—the mob gets the upper
hand along with dialectics. Previous to Socrates dialectic manners
were repudiated in good society; they were regarded as indecent; the
youths were Warned against them. What was the purpose of this display
of reasons? Why demonstrate? Against others one could use authority.
One commanded, and that sufficed. Among friends,inter pares,there
was tradition—alsoa form of authority: and last but not least,
one understood each other. There was no room found for dialectics.
Besides, all such modes of presenting reasons were distrusted. All
honest things do not carry their reasons in their hands in such
fashion. It is indecent to show all the five fingers at the same time.
That which can be "demonstrated" is little worth. The instinct of
every party-speaker tells him that dialectics excites mistrust and
carries little conviction. Nothing is more easily wiped away than the
effect of a dialectician. It can only be alast defence.One must
be in an extremity; it is necessary to have toextortone's rights;
otherwise one makes no use of dialectics. That is why the Jews were
dialecticians, Reynard the Fox was a dialectician, and so was Socrates.
As a dialectician a person has a merciless instrument in his hand:
he can play the tyrant with it; he compromises when he conquers. The
dialectician leaves it to his opponent to demonstrate that he is not an
idiot; he is made furiousand helpless, while the dialectician himself
remains calm and still possessed of his triumphant reasoning powers—heparalyseshis opponent's intellect.—The dialectician's irony is a
form of mob-revenge: the ferocity of the oppressed lies in the cold
knife-cuts of the syllogism....In Plato, as in all men of excessive sensuality and wild fancies, the
charm of concepts was so great, that he involuntarily honoured and
deified the concept as a form of ideal.Dialectical intoxication: as
the consciousness of being able to exercise control over one's self by
means of it—as an instrument of the Will to Power.432.The problem of Socrates.—The two antitheses: thetragicand theSocraticspirits—measured according to the law of Life.To what extent is the Socratic spirit a decadent phenomenon? to what
extent are robust health and power still revealed by the whole attitude
of the scientific man, his dialectics, his ability, and his severity?
(the health of theplebeian; whose malice,esprit frondeur,whose astuteness, whose rascally depths, are held in check by hiscleverness; the whole type is "ugly").Uglification: self-derision, dialectical dryness, intelligence in
the form of atyrantagainst the "tyrant" (instinct). Everything in
Socrates is exaggeration, eccentricity, caricature; he is a buffoon
with the blood of Voltaire in his veins.He discovers a new form ofagon; he is the first fencing-master in
the superior classed of Athens; he stands for nothing else than thehighest form of cleverness: he calls it "virtue" (he regarded it as a
means ofsalvation; he did not choose to beclever,cleverness wasde rigueur); the proper thing is to control one's self in suchwise
that one enters into a strugglenotwith passions but with reasons
as one's weapons (Spinoza's stratagem—the unravelment of the errors
of passion);—it is desirable to discover how every one may be caught
once he is goaded into a passion, and to know how illogically passion
proceeds; self-mockery is practised in order to injure the very roots
of thefeelings of resentment.It is my wish to understand which idiosyncratic states form a part of
the Socratic problem: its association of reason, virtue, and happiness.
With this absurd doctrine of the identity of these things it succeededin charmingthe world: ancient philosophy could not rid itself of
this doctrine....Absolute lack of objective interest: hatred of science: the
idiosyncrasy of considering one's self a problem. Acoustic
hallucinations in Socrates: morbid element. When the intellect is
rich and independent, it most strongly resists preoccupying itself
with morality. How is it that Socrates is amoral-maniac?—Every
"practical" philosophy immediately steps into the foreground in times
of distress. When morality and religion become the chief interests of a
community, they are signs of a state of distress.433.Intelligence, clearness, hardness, and logic as weapons against thewildness of the instincts. The latter must be dangerous and must
threaten ruin, otherwise no purpose can be served by developingintelligenceto this degree of tyranny. In order to make atyrantof intelligence the instincts must first have proved themselves
tyrants. This is the problem. It was a very timely one in those days.
Reason became virtue—virtue equalled happiness.Solution: Greek philosophers stand upon the same fundamental fact
of their inner experiences as Socrates does; five feet from excess,
from anarchy and from dissolution—all decadent men. They regard him
as a doctor: Logic as will to power, as will to control self, as will
to "happiness." The wildness and anarchy of Socrates' instincts is asign of decadence, as is also the superfœtation of logic and clear
reasoning in him. Both are abnormities, each belongs to the other.
Criticism. Decadence reveals itself in this concern about "happiness"
(i.e.about the "salvation of the soul";i.e. to feel that one's
condition is a danger). Its fanatical interest in "happiness" shows
the pathological condition of the subconscious self: it was a vital
interest. Thealternativewhich faced them all was: to be reasonable
or to perish. The morality of Greek philosophers shows that they felt
they were in danger.434.Why everything resolved itself into mummery.—Rudimentary
psychology, which only considered theconsciouslapses of men (as
causes), which regarded "consciousness" as an attribute of the soul,
and which sought a will behind every action (i.e.an intention),
could only answer "Happiness" to the question: "What does man
desire?" (it was impossible to answer "Power," because that would have
beenimmoral);—consequently behind all men's actions there is the
intention of attaining to happiness by means of them. Secondly: if man
as a matter of fact does not attain to happiness, why is it? Because he
mistakes the means thereto.—What is the unfailing means of acquiring
happiness?Answer:virtue.—Why virtue? Because virtue is supreme
rationalness, and rationalness makes mistakes in the choice of means
impossible: virtue in the form ofreasonis the way to happiness.
Dialectics is the constant occupation of virtue, because it does away
with passion and intellectual cloudiness.As a matter of fact, man doesnotdesire "happiness." Pleasure is
a sensation of power: if the passions are excluded, those states of
the mind are also excluded which afford the greatest sensation of
power and therefore of pleasure. The highest rationalism is a state of
cool clearness, which is very far from being able to bring about that
feeling of power which every kind ofexaltationinvolves....The ancient philosophers combat everythingthat intoxicates and
exalts—everything that impairs the perfect coolness and impartiality
of the mind.... They were consistent with their first false principle:
that consciousness was thehighest,thesupremestate of mind, the
prerequisite of perfection—whereas the reverse is true....Any kind of action is imperfect in proportion as it has been willed or
conscious. The philosophers of antiquitywere the greatest duffersin practice, "because they condemned themselves" theoretically
todufferdom,.... In practice everything resolved itself into
theatricalness: and he who saw through it, as Pyrrho did, for instance,
thought as everybody did—that is to say, that in goodness and
uprightness "paltry people" were far superior to philosophers.All the deeper natures of antiquity were disgusted at thephilosophers
of virtue; all people saw in them was brawlers and actors. (This was
the judgment passed onPlatobyEpicurusandPyrrho.)Result: In practical life, in patience, goodness, and mutual
assistance, paltry people were above them:—this is something like the
judgment Dostoiewsky or Tolstoy claims for his muzhiks: they are more
philosophical in practice, they are more courageous in their way of
dealing with the exigencies of life....435.A criticism of the philosopher.—Philosophers and moralists merely
deceive themselves when theyimagine that they escape from decadence
byopposingit. That lies beyond their wills: and however little they
may be aware of the fact, it is generally discovered, subsequently that
they were among the most powerful promoters of decadence.Let us examine the philosophers of Greece—Plato, for instance. He
it was who separated the instincts from the polis, from the love of
contest, from military efficiency, from art, beauty, the mysteries,
and the belief in tradition and in ancestors.... He was the seducer of
the nobles: he himself seduces through theroturierSocrates.... He
denied all the first principles of the "noble Greek" of sterling worth;
he made dialectics an everyday practice, conspired with the tyrants,
dabbled in politics for the future, and was the example of a man whoseinstinctswere the example of a man whoseinstinctswere most
perfectly separated fromtradition.He is profound and passionate in
everything that isanti-Hellenic....One after the other, these great philosophers represent thetypicalforms of decadence: the moral and religious idiosyncrasy, anarchy,
nihilism, (ἀδιαφορία), cynicism, hardening principles, hedonism, and
reaction.The question of "happiness," of "virtue," and of the "salvation of the
soul," is the expression ofphysiological contradictorinessin these
declining natures: their instincts lack allbalanceandpurpose.436.To what extent do dialectics and the faith in reason rest uponmoralprejudices? With Plato we are as the temporary inhabitants of an
intelligible world of goodness, still in possession of a bequest from
former times: divine dialectics taking its root in goodness leads to
everything good (it follows, therefore, that it must lead "backwards").
Even Descartes had a notion of the fact that, according to a thoroughly
Christian and moral attitude of mind, which includes a belief in agoodGod as the Creator of all things, the truthfulness of Godguaranteesthe judgments of our senses for us. But for this religious
sanction and warrant of our senses and our reason, whence should
we obtain our right to trust in existence? That thinking must be a
measure of reality,—that what cannot be the subject of thought, cannotexist,—is a coarsenon plus ultraof a moral blind confidence
(in the essential principle of truth at the root of all things); this
in itself is a mad assumption which our experience contradicts every
minute. We cannot think of anything precisely as it is....437.The realphilosophers of Greeceare those which came before Socrates
(with Socrates something changes). They are all distinguished men,
they take their stand away from the people and from usage; they have
travelled; they are earnestto the point of sombreness, their eyes
are calm, and they are not unacquainted with the business of state and
diplomacy. They anticipated all the great concepts which coming sages
were to have concerning things in general: they themselves represented
these concepts, they made systems out of themselves. Nothing run give a
higher idea of Greek intellect than this sudden fruitfulness in types,
than this involuntary completeness in the drawing up of all the great
possibilities of the philosophical ideal. I can see only one original
figure in those that came afterwards: a late arrival but necessarily
the last—Pyrrhothe nihilist. His instincts were opposed to the
influences which had become ascendant in the mean-time the Socratic
school, Plato, and the artistic optimism of Heraclitus. (Pyrrho goes
back to DemocritusviaProtagoras....)***Wise weariness: Pyrrho. To live humbly among the humble. Devoid of
pride. To live in the vulgar way; to honour and believe what every
one believes. To be on one's guard against science and intellect, and
against everything thatpuffs one out.... To be simply patient
in the extreme, careless and mild;—ὰπάθειαor, better still,
πραῢτης. A Buddhist for Greece, bred amid the tumult of the
Schools; born alter his time; weary; an example of the protest of
weariness against the eagerness of dialecticians; the incredulity of
the tired man in regardto the importance of everything. He had seenAlexander; he had seen theIndian penitents.To such late-arrivals
and creatures of great subtlety, everything lowly, poor, and idiotic,
is seductive. It narcoticises: it gives them relaxation (Pascal).
On the other hand, they mix with the crowd, and get confounded
with the rest. These weary creatures need warmth.... To overcome
contradiction; to do away with contests; to have no will to excel in
any way; to deny theGreekinstincts (Pyrrho lived with his sister,
who was a midwife.) To rig out wisdom in such a way that it no longer
distinguishes; to give it the ragged mantle of poverty; to perform
the lowest offices, and to go to market and sell sucking-pigs....
Sweetness, clearness, indifference; no need of virtues that require
attitudes; to be equal to all even in virtue: final conquest of one's
self, final indifference.Pyrrho and Epicurus;—two forms of Greek decadence; they are related
in their hatred of dialectics and alltheatricalvirtues. These
two things together were then called philosophy; Pyrrho and Epicurus
intentionally held that which they loved in low esteem; they chose
common and even contemptible names for it, and they represented a state
in which one is neither ill, healthy, lively, nor dead.... Epicurus was
morenaïf,more idyllic, more grateful; Pyrrho had more experience of
the world, had travelled more, and was more nihilistic. His life was a
protest against the greatdoctrine of Identity(Happiness = Virtue =
Knowledge). The proper way of living is not promoted by science: wisdom
does not make"wise." ... The proper way of living does not desire
happiness, it turns away from happiness....438.The war against the "old faith," as Epicurus waged it, was, strictly
speaking, a struggle againstpre-existingChristianity—the struggle
against a world then already gloomy, moralised, acidified throughout
with feelings of guilt, and grown old and sick.Not the "moral corruption" of antiquity, but precisely itsmoral
infectednesswas the prerequisite which enabled Christianity to become
its master. Moral fanaticism (in short: Plato) destroyed paganism by
transvaluing its values and poisoning its innocence. We ought at last
to understand that what was then destroyed washigherthan what
prevailed! Christianity grew on the soil of psychological corruption,
and could only take root in rotten ground.439.Science: as a disciplinary measure or as an instinct—I see a decline
of the instincts in Greek philosophers: otherwise they could not have
been guilty of the profound error of regarding the conscious state
as the more valuable state. The intensity of consciousness stands in
the inverse ratio to the ease and speed of cerebral transmission.
Greek philosophy upheld the opposite view, which is always the sign of
weakened instincts.We must, in sooth, seekperfect lifethere where it is least
conscious (that is to say, there where it is least aware of its logic,
its reasons, its means, its intentions, and itsutility).The return
to the facts ofcommon sense,the facts of the common man and of
"paltry people."Honesty and intelligencestored up for generations
of people who are quite unconscious of their principles, and who
even have some fear of principles. It is not reasonable to desire areasoning virtue.... A philosopher is compromised by such a desire.440.When morality—that is to say, refinement, prudence, bravery, and
equity—have been stored up in the same way, thanks to the moral
efforts of a whole succession of generations, the collective power of
this hoard of virtue projects its rays even into that sphere where
honesty is most seldom present—the sphere ofintellect.When a
thing becomes conscious, it is the sign of a state of ill-ease in
the organism; something new has got to be found, the organism is not
satisfied or adapted, it is subject to distress, suspense, and it is
hypersensitive—precisely all this is consciousness....Gennius lies in the instincts; goodness does too. One only acts
perfectly when one acts instinctively. Even from the moral point of
view all thinking which is conscious is merely a process of groping,
and in the majority of cases an attack on morality. Scientific honesty
is always sacrificedwhen a thinker begins to reason: let any one try
the experiment: put the wisest man in the balance, and then let him
discourse upon morality....It could also be proved that the whole of a man'sconsciousthinking
shows a much lower standard of morality than the thoughts of the same
man would show if they were led by hisinstincts.441.The struggle against Socrates, Plato, and all the Socratic schools,
proceeds from the profound instinct that manisnot madebetterwhen he is shown that virtue may be demonstrated or based upon
reason.... This in the end is the niggardly fact, it was the agonal
instinct in all these born dialecticians, which drove them to glorify
theirpersonal abilitiesas thehighest of all qualities,and to
represent every other form of goodness as conditioned by them. Theanti-scientificspirit of all this "philosophy": itwill never admit
that it is not right.442.This is extraordinary. From its very earliest beginnings, Greek
philosophy carries on a struggle against science with the weapons of
a theory of knowledge, especially of scepticism; and why is this? It
is always in favour ofmorality....(Physicists and medical men
are hated.) Socrates, Aristippus, the Megarian school, the Cynics,
Epicurus and Pyrrho—a general onslaught uponknowledge in favour
ofmorality....(Hatred of dialectics also.) There is still a
problem to be solved: they approach sophistry in order to be rid of
science. On the other hand, the physicists are subjected to such an
extent that, among their first principles, they include the theory of
truth and of real being: for instance, the atom, the four elements
(juxtapositionof being, in order to explain its multiformity and its
transformations). Contempt ofobjectivityin interests is taught:
return to practical interest, and to the personal utility of all
knowledge....The struggle against science is directed at: (1) its pathos
(objectivity); (2) its means (that is to say, at its utility); (3) its
results (which are considered childish). It is the same struggle which
is taken up later on by theChurchin the name of piety: the Church
inherited the whole arsenal of antiquity for her war with science. The
theory of knowledge played the same part in the affair as it did in
Kant's or the Indians' case. There is no desire whatever to be troubled
with it, a free hand is wanted for the "purpose" that is envisaged.Against what powers are they actually defending themselves? Against
dutifulness, against obedience to law, against the compulsion of going
hand in hand—I believe this is what is calledFreedom....This is how decadence manifests itself: the instinct of solidarity is
so degenerate that solidarity itself gets to be regarded astyranny:
no authority or solidarity is brooked, nobody any longerdesires to
fall in with the rank and file, and to adopt its ignobly slow pace. The
slow movement which is the tempo of science is generally hated, as are
also the scientific man's indifference in regard to getting on, his
long breath, and his impersonal attitude.443.At bottom, morality ishostileto science: Socrates was so already
too—and the reason is, that science considers certain things important
which have no relation whatsoever to "good" and "evil," and which
therefore reduce the gravity of our feelings concerning "good" and
"evil." What morality requires is that the whole of a man should serve
it with all his power: it considers it waste on the part of a creature
thatcan ill afford waste,when a man earnestly troubles his head
about stars or plants. That is why science very quickly declined
in Greece, once Socrates had inoculated scientific work with the
disease of morality. The mental attitudes reached by a Democritus, a
Hippocrates, and a Thucydides, have not been reached a second time.—444.The problem of thephilosopherand of thescientificman.—The
influence of age; depressing habits (sedentary studyà laKant;
over-work; inadequate nourishment of the brain; reading). A more
essential question still: is it not already perhaps asymptomof
decadence when thinking tends to establishgeneralities?Objectivity regarded as the disintegration of the will(to be able
to remain as detached as possible ...). This presupposes a tremendous
adiaphora in regard to the strong passions: a kind of isolation, an
exceptional position, opposition to the normal passions.Type: desertion ofhome-countryemigrants go ever greater distances
afield; growing exoticism; the voice of the old imperative dies
away;—and the continual question "whither?" ("happiness") is a sign
ofemancipationfrom forms of organisation, a sign of breaking loose
from everything.Problem: is the man ofsciencemore of a decadent symptom than the
philosopher?—as awholescientific man is not, cut loose from
everything, only a part of his being is consecrated exclusively to the
service of knowledge and disciplined to maintain a special attitude and
point of view; in his department he is in need ofallthe virtues
of a strong race, of robust health, of great severity, manliness and
intelligence. He is rather a symptom of the great multiformity of
culture than of the effeteness of the latter. The decadent scholar
is abadscholar. Whereas the decadent philosopher has always been
reckoned hitherto as the typical philosopher.445.Among philosophers, nothing is more rare thanintellectual
uprightness: they perhaps say the very reverse, and even believe it.
But the prerequisite of all their work is, that they can only admit
ofcertain truths; they know what theyhaveto prove; and the fact
that they must be agreed as to these "truths" is almost what makes them
recognise one another as philosophers. There are, for instance, the
truths of morality. But belief in morality is not a proof of morality:
there are cases—and the philosopher's case is one in point—when a
belief of this sort is simply a piece ofimmorality.446.What is the retrograde factor in a philosopher?—He teaches that
the qualities which he happens to possess are the only qualities that
exist, that they are indispensable to those who wish to attain to the
"highest good" (for instance, dialectics with Plato). He would have
all men raise themselves,gradatim,tohistype as the highest. He
despises what is generally esteemed—by him a gulf is cleft between
the highestpriestlyvalues and the values of theworld.He knows
what is true, who God is, what every one's goal should be, and the way
thereto.... The typical philosopher is thus an absolute dogmatist;—if
herequiresscepticism at all it is only in order to be able to speak
dogmatically of hisprincipal purpose.447.When the philosopher is confronted with his rival—science, for
instance, he becomes a sceptic; then he appropriates aform of
knowledgewhich he denies to the man of science; he goes hand inhand with the priest so that he may not be suspected of atheism or
materialism; he considers an attack made upon himself as an attack
upon morals, religion, virtue, and order—he knows how to bring his
opponents into ill repute by calling them "seducers" and "underminers":
then he marches shoulder to shoulder with power.The philosopher at war with other philosophers:—he does his best
to compel them to appear like anarchists, disbelievers, opponents of
authority. In short, when he fights, he fights exactly like a priest
and like the priesthood.3. The Truths and Errors of Philosophers.448.Philosophy defined by Kant: "The science of the limitations of
reason"!!449.According to Aristotle, Philosophy is the art of discovering truth. On
the other hand, the Epicurians, who availed themselves of Aristotle'ssensualtheory of knowledge, retorted in ironical opposition to the
search for truth: "Philosophy is the art ofLife."450.The three great naïvetés:—Knowledge as a means of happiness (as if ...);Knowledge as a means to virtue (as if ...);Knowledge as a means to the "denial of Life"—inasmuch as it leads to
disappointment—(as if ...).451.As if there were a "truth" which one could by some means approach!452.Error and ignorance are fatal.—The assumption thattruth has been
foundand that ignorance and error are at an end, constitutes one
of the most seductive thoughts in the world. Granted that it be
generally accepted, it paralyses the will to test, to investigate,
to be cautious, and to gather experience: it may even be regarded as
criminal—that is to say, as adoubtconcerning truth...."Truth" is therefore more fatal than error and ignorance, because it
paralyses the forces which lead to enlightenment and knowledge. The
passion foridlenessnow stands up for "truth" ("Thought is pain
and misery!"), as also do order, rule, the joy of possession, the
pride of wisdom—in fact,vanity.—it is easier toobeythan toexamine; it is more gratifying to think "I possess the truth," than
to see only darkness in all directions; ... but, above all, it is
reassuring, it lends confidence, and alleviates life—it "improves"
the character inasmuch as itreduces mistrust." Spiritual peace," "a
quiet conscience"—these thingsare inventions which are only possible
provided "Truth be found."—"By their fruits ye shall know them." ...
"Truth" is the truth because it makes menbetter....The process goes
on: all goodness and all success is placed to the credit of "truth."This is theproof by success: the happiness, contentment, and the
welfare of a community or of an individual, are now understood to be
theresult of the belief in morality.... Conversely:failureis
ascribed to alackof faith.453.The causes of error lie just as much in thegoodas in thebad willof man:—in an incalculable number of cases he conceals reality from
himself, he falsifies it, so that he may not suffer from his good or
bad will. God, for instance, is considered the shaper of man's destiny;
he interprets his little lot as though everything were intentionally
sent to him for the salvation of his soul,—this act of ignorance in
"philology," which to a more subtle intellect would seem unclean and
false, is done, in the majority of cases, with perfectgood faith.Goodwill, "noble feelings," and "lofty states of the soul" are just as
underhand and deceptive in the means they use as are the passions love,
hatred, and revenge, which morality has repudiated and declared to be
egotistic.Errors are what mankind has had to pay for most dearly: and taking them
all in all, the errors which have resulted from goodwill are those
whichhave wrought the most harm. The illusion which makes people
happy is more harmful than the illusion which is immediately followed
by evil results: the latter increases keenness and mistrust, and
purifies, the understanding; the former merely narcoticises....Fine feelings and noble impulses ought, speaking physiologically, to be
classified with the narcotics: their abuse is followed by precisely the
same results as the abuse of any other opiate—weak nerves.454.Error is the most expensive luxury that man can indulge in: and if the
error happen to be a physiological one, it is fatal to life. What has
mankind paid for most dearly hitherto? For its "truths ": for every one
of these were errorsin physiologicis>....455.Psychologicalconfusions: thedesire for beliefis confounded with
the "will to truth" (for instance, in Carlyle). But thedesire for
disbeliefhas also been confounded with the "will to truth" (a need of
ridding one's self of a belief for a hundred reasons: in order to carry
one's point against certain "believers").What is it that inspires
Sceptics?The hatred of dogmatists—or a need of repose, weariness as
in Pyrrho's case.Theadvantageswhich were expected to come from truth, were the
advantages resulting from a belief init: for, in itself, truth could
have beenthoroughly painful, harmful, and even fatal. Likewise truth
was combated only on account of the advantages which a victory over it
would provide—for instance, emancipation from the yoke of the ruling
powers.The method of truth wasnotbased upon motives of truthfulness, but
uponmotives of power, upon the desire to be superior.How istruthproved? By means of the feeling of increased
power,—by means of utility,—by means of indispensability,—in short,
by means of its advantages(that is to say, hypotheses concerning what
truth should be like in order that it may be embraced by us). But this
involvesprejudice: it is a sign thattruthdoes not enter the
question at all....What is the meaning of the "will to truth," for instance in the
Goncourts? and in thenaturalists?—A criticism of "objectivity."Why should we know: why should we not prefer to be deceived?...
But what was needed was always belief—andnottruth.... Belief
is created by means which are quiteopposedto the method of
investigation:it even depends upon the exclusion of the latter.456.A certain degree of faith suffices to-day to give us anobjectionto what is believed—it does more, it makes us question the spiritual
healthiness of the believer.457.Martyrs.—To combat anything that is based upon reverence, opponents
must be possessed of both daring and recklessness, and be hindered
by no scruples.... Now, if one considers that for thousands of
years man has sanctified as truths only those things which were in
reality errors, and that he has branded any criticism of them with
the hall-mark of badness, one will have to acknowledge, however
reluctantly, that a goodly amount ofimmoral deedswere necessary in
order to give the initiative to an attack—I mean toreason....That
these immoralists have always posed as the "martyrs of truth" should
be forgiven them: the truth of the matter is that they did not stand
up and deny owing to an instinct for truth; but because of a love of
dissolution, criminal scepticism, and the love of adventure. In other
cases it is personal rancour which drives them into the province of
problems—they only combat certain points of view in order to be
able to carry their point against certain people. But, above all, it
is revenge which has become scientifically useful—the revenge of the
oppressed, those who, thanks to the truth that happens to be ruling,
have been pressed aside and even smothered....Truth, that is to say the scientific method, was grasped and favoured
by such as recognised that it was a useful weapon of war—an instrument
ofdestruction....In order to be honoured as opponents, theywere moreover obliged
to use an apparatus similar to that used by those whom they were
attacking: they therefore brandished the concept "truth" as absolutely
as their adversaries did—they became fanatics at least in their
poses, because no other pose could be expected to be taken seriously.
What still remained to be done was left to persecution, to passion,
and the uncertainty of the persecuted—hatred waxed great, and the
first impulse began to die away and to leave the field entirely to
science. Ultimately all of them wanted to be right in the same absurd
way as their opponents.... The word "conviction," "faith," the pride
of martyrdom—these things are most unfavourable to knowledge. The
adversaries of truth finally adopt the whole subjective manner of
deciding about truth,—that is to say, by means of poses, sacrifices,
and heroic resolutions,—and thusprolongthedominionof the
anti-scientific method. As martyrs they compromise their very own deed.458.The dangerous distinction between "theoretical" and "practical"in
Kant for instance, but also in the ancient philosophers:—they behave
as if pure intellectuality presented them with the problems of science
and metaphysics;—they behave as if practice should be judged by a
measure of its own, whatever the judgment of theory may be.Against the first tendency I set up mypsychology of philosophers:
their strangest calculations and "intellectuality" are still but the
last pallid impress of a physiological fact; spontaneity is absolutely
lacking in them, everything is instinct, everything is intended to
follow a certain direction from the first....Against the second tendency I put my question: whether we know another
method of acting correctly, besides that of thinking correctly;
the last caseisaction, the first presupposes thought Are we
possessed of a means whereby we can judge of the value of a method
of life differently from the value of a theory: through induction or
comparison?... Guileless people imagine that in this respect we are
better equipped, we know what is "good"—and the philosophers are
content to repeat this view. We conclude that some sort offaithis
at work in this matter, and nothing more...."Men must act;consequentlyrules of conduct are necessary"—this is
what even the ancient Sceptics thought. Theurgent needof a definite
decision in this department of knowledge is used as an argument in
favour of regarding something astrue!..."Men must not act"—said their more consistent brothers, the Buddhists,
and then thought out a mode of conduct which would deliver man from the
yoke of action....To adapt one's self, to live as the "common man" lives, and to regard
as right and proper whatheregards as right: this issubmissionto
thegregarious instinct.One must carry one's courageand severity
so far as to learn to consider such submission adisgrace.One should
not live according to two standards!... One should not separate theory
and practice!...459.Of all that which was formerly held to be true, not one word is to be
credited. Everything which was formerly disdained as unholy, forbidden,
contemptible, and fatal—all these flowers now bloom on the most
charming paths of truth.The whole of this old morality concerns us no longer: it contains not
one idea which is still worthy of respect. We have outlived it—we
are no longer sufficiently coarse and guileless to be forced to allow
ourselves to be lied to in this way.... In more polite language: we are
too virtuous for it.... And if truth in the old sense were "true" only
because the old morality said "yea" to it, andhad a rightto say
"yea" to it: it follows that no truth of the past can any longer be of
use to us.... Ourcriterionof truth is /certainly not morality: werefutean assertion when we show that it is dependent upon morality
and is inspired by noble feelings.460.All these values are empirical and conditioned. But he who believes
in them and who honours them,refusesto acknowledge this aspect of
them.All philosophers believe in these values, and one form their
reverence takes is the endeavour to makea priori truthsout of them.
The falsifying nature ofreverence....Reverence is the supreme test of intellectualhonesty,but in the
whole history of philosophy there is no such thing as intellectual
honesty,—but the "love of goodness ..."On the one hand, there is an absolutelack of methodin testing the
value of these values;secondly,there is a general disinclination
either to test them or to regard them as conditioned at all.—Allanti-scientificinstincts assembled round moral values in order tokeep science outof this department....4. Concluding Remarks in the Criticism of Philosophy.461.Why philosophers are slanderers.—The artful and blind hostility
of philosophers towards thesenses—what an amount ofmobandmiddle-classqualities lie in all this hatred!The crowd always believes that an abuse of which it feels the harmful
results, constitutes anobjectionto the thing which happens to be
abused: all insurrectionary movements against principles, whether in
politics or agriculture, always follow a line of argument suggested by
this ulterior motive: the abuse must be shown to be necessary to, and,
inherent in, the principle.It is awoefulhistory: mankind looks for a principle, from the
standpoint of which he will be able to contemn man—he invents a world
in order to be able to slander and throw mud at this world: as a matter
of fact, he snatches every time at nothing, and construes this nothing
as "God," as "Truth," and, in any case, as judge and detractor ofthisexistence....If one should require a proof of how deeply and thoroughly the actuallybarbarousneeds of man, even in his present state of tameness and
"civilisation," still seek gratification, one should contemplate the
"leitmotifs" of the whole of the evolution of philosophy:—a sort
of revenge upon reality, a surreptitious process of destroying the
values by means of which men live, adissatisfiedsoul to which
the conditions of discipline is one of torture, and which takes a
particular pleasure in morbidly severing all the bonds that bind it to
such a condition.The history of philosophy is the story of asecret and mad hatredof the prerequisities of Life, of the feelings which make for the
real values of Life, and of all partisanship in favour of Life.
Philosophers have never hesitated to affirm a fanciful world, provided
it contradicted this world, and furnished them with a weapon wherewith
they could calumniate this world. Up to the present, philosophy has
been thegrand school of slander: and its power has been so great,
that even to-day our science, which pretends to be the advocate of
Life, hasacceptedthe fundamental position of slander, and treats
this world as"appearance," and this chain of causes as though it were
only phenomenal. What is the hatred which is active here?I fear that it is still theCirce of philosophers—Morality, which
plays them the trick of compelling them to be ever slanderers.... They
believed in moral "truths," in these they thought they had found the
highest values; what alternative had they left, save that of denying
existence ever more emphatically the more they got to know about it?...
For this life isimmoral....And it is based upon immoral first
principles: and morality saysnayto Life.Let us suppress the real world: and in order to do this, we must first
suppress the highest values current hitherto—morals.... It is enough
to show that morality itselfis immoral,in the same sense as that in
which immorality has been condemned heretofore. If an end be thus made
to the tyranny of the former values, if we have suppressed the "real
world," anew order of valuesmust follow of its own accord.The world of appearance and the worldof lies: this constitutes the
contradiction. The latter hitherto has been the "real world," "truth,"
"God." This is the one which we still have to suppress.Thelogic of my conception:(1)Morality as the highest value(it is master ofallthe phases
of philosophy, even of the Sceptics).Result: this world is no good,
it is not the "real world."(2)Whatis it that determines the highest value here? What, in
sooth, is morality?—It isthe instinct ofdecadence; it is the
means whereby the exhausted and the degeneraterevenge themselves.Historicalproof: philosophers have always been decadents ... in the
service ofnihilisticreligions.(3) It is the instinct of decadence coming to the fore aswill to
power.Proof: the absoluteimmoralityof the means employed by
morality throughout its history.General aspect: the values which have been highest hitherto constitute
a specific case of the will to power; morality itself is a specific
case of immorality.462.The principal innovations: Instead of "moral values," nothing butnaturalistic values.Naturalisation of morality.In the place of "sociology," adoctrine of the forms of dominion.In the place of "society," thecomplex whole of culture,which ismychief interest (whether in its entirety or in parts).In the place of the "theory of knowledge," adoctrine which laid down
the value of the passions(to this a hierarchy of the passions would
belong: the passionstransfigured; theirsuperior rank,their
"spirituality").In the place of "metaphysics" and religion, the doctrine ofEternal
Recurrence(this being regarded as a means to the breeding and
selection of men).463.My precursors: Schopenhauer. To what extent I deepened pessimism, and
first brought its full meaning within my grasp, by means of its most
extreme opposite.Likewise: the higher Europeans, the pioneers ofgreat politics.Likewise: the Greeks and their genesis.464.I have named those who were unconsciously my workers and precursors.
But in what direction may I turn with any hope of finding my particular
kind of philosophers themselves, or at leastmy yearning for new
philosophers? In that direction, alone, where anobleattitude of
mind prevails, an attitude of mind which believes in slavery and in
manifold orders of rank, as the prerequisites of any high degree of
culture. In that direction, alone, where acreativeattitude of
mind prevails, an attitude of mind which does not regard the world
of happiness and repose, the "Sabbath of Sabbaths" as an end to be
desired, and which, even in peace, honours the means which lead to new
wars; an attitude of mind which would prescribe laws for the future,
which for the sake of the future would treat everything that exists
to-day with harshness and even tyranny; a daring and "immoral" attitude
of mind, which would wish to see both the good and the evil qualities
in man developed to their fullest extent,because it would feel itself
able to put each in its right place—that is to say, in that place in
which each would need the other. But what prospect has he of finding
what he seeks, who goes in search of philosophers to-day? Is it not
probable that, even with the best Diogenes-lantern in his hand, he will
wander about by night and day in vain? This age is possessed of theoppositeinstincts. What it wants, above all, is comfort; secondly,
it wants publicity and the deafening din of actors' voices, the big
drum which appeals to its Bank-Holiday tastes; thirdly, that every
one should lie on his belly in utter subjection before the greatest
of all lies—which is "the equality of men"—and should honour only
those virtues whichmake men equal and place them in equal positions.But in this way, the rise of the philosopher, as I understand him, is
made completely impossible—despite the fact that many may regard the
present tendencies as rather favourable to his advent. As a matter of
fact, the whole world mourns, to-day, the hard times that philosophersusedto have, hemmed in between the fear of the stake, a guilty
conscience, and the presumptuous wisdom of the Fathers of the Church:
but the truth is, that precisely these conditions wereever so much
more favourableto the education of a mighty, extensive, subtle,
rash, and daring intellect than the conditions prevailing to-day. At
present another kind of intellect, the intellect of the demagogue, of
the actor, and perhaps of the beaver- and ant-like scholar too, finds
the best possible conditions for its development. But evenfor artists
of a superior calibre the conditions are already far from favourable:
for does not every one of them, almost, perish owing to his want of
discipline? They are no longer tyrannised over by an outside power—by
the tables of absolute values enforced by a Church or by a
monarch: and thus they no longer learn to develop their "inner tyrant,"
theirwill.And what holds good of artists also holds good, to a
greater and more fatal degree, of philosophers. Where, then, are free
spirits to be found to-day? Let any one show me a free spirit to-day!465.Under "Spiritual freedom" I understand something very definite: it is
a state in which one is a hundred times superior to philosophers and
other disciples of "truth" in one's severity towards one's self, in
one's uprightness, in one's courage, and in one's absolute will to say
nay even when it is dangerous to say nay. I regard the philosophers
that have appeared heretofore ascontemptible libertineshiding
behind the petticoats of the female "Truth."END OF VOL. I.