27.The Self-Renouncer.—What does the self-renouncer
do? He strives after a higher world,
he wants to fly longer and further and higher than
all men of affirmation—hethrows away many thingsthat would burden his flight, and several things
among them that are not valueless, that are not
unpleasant to him: he sacrifices them to his desire
for elevation. Now this sacrificing, this casting
away, is the very thing which becomes visible in
him: on that account one calls him the self-renouncer,
and as such he stands before us,
enveloped in his cowl, and as the soul of a
hair-shirt. With this effect, however, which he
makes upon us he is well content: he wants to
keep concealed from us his desire, his pride, his
intention of flyingaboveus.—Yes! He is wiser
than we thought, and so courteous towards us—this
affirmer! For that is what he is, like us,
even in his self-renunciation.28.Injuring with one's best Qualities.—Our strong
points sometimes drive us so far forward that we
cannot any longer endure our weaknesses, and we
perish by them: we also perhaps see this result
beforehand, but nevertheless do not want it to be
otherwise. We then become hard towards that
which would fain be spared in us, and our pitilessness
is also our greatness. Such an experience,
which must in the end cost us our life, is a symbolof the collective effect of great men upon others
and upon their epoch:—it is just with their best
abilities, with that which onlytheycan do, that they
destroy much that is weak, uncertain, evolving, andwilling, and are thereby injurious. Indeed, the
case may happen in which, taken on the whole,
they only do injury, because their best is accepted
and drunk up as it were solely by those who lose
their understanding and their egoism by it, as by
too strong a beverage; they become so intoxicated
that they go breaking their limbs on all the wrong
roads where their drunkenness drives them.29.Adventitious Liars.—When people began to
combat the unity of Aristotle in France, and consequently
also to defend it, there was once more
to be seen that which has been seen so often, but
seen so unwillingly:—people imposed false reasons
on themselveson account of which those laws ought
to exist, merely for the sake of not acknowledging
to themselves that they hadaccustomedthemselves
to the authority of those laws, and did not want
any longer to have things otherwise. And people
do so in every prevailing morality and religion, and
have always done so: the reasons and intentions
behind the habit, are only added surreptitiously
when people begin to combat the habit, andaskfor
reasons and intentions. It is here that the great
dishonesty of the conservatives of all times hides:—they
are adventitious liars.30.The Comedy of Celebrated Men.—Celebrated men
whoneedtheir fame, as, for instance, all politicians,
no longer select their associates and friends without
after-thoughts: from the one they want a portion
of the splendour and reflection of his virtues; from
the other they want the fear-inspiring power of
certain dubious qualities in him, of which everybody
is aware; from another they steal his reputation
for idleness and basking in the sun, because it
is advantageous for their own ends to be regarded
temporarily as heedless and lazy:—it conceals the
fact that they lie in ambush; they now use the
visionaries, now the experts, now the brooders, now
the pedants in their neighbourhood, as their actual
selves for the time, but very soon they do not
need them any longer! And thus while their environment
and outside die off continually, everything
seems to crowd into this environment,
and wants to become a "character" of it; they
are like great cities in this respect. Their repute
is continually in process of mutation, like their
character, for their changing methods require this
change, and they show andexhibitsometimes this
and sometimes that actual or fictitious quality on
the stage; their friends and associates, as we have
said, belong to these stage properties. On the other
hand, that which they aim at must remain so much
the more steadfast, and burnished and resplendent
in the distance,—and this also sometimes needs its
comedy and its stage-play.31.Commerce and Nobility.—Buying and selling is
now regarded as something ordinary, like the art
of reading and writing; everyone is now trained
to it even when he is not a tradesman, exercising
himself daily in the art; precisely as formerly in
the period of uncivilised humanity, everyone was a
hunter and exercised himself day by day in the
art of hunting. Hunting was then something
common: but just as this finally became a privilege
of the powerful and noble, and thereby lost the
character of the commonplace and the ordinary—by
ceasing to be necessary and by becoming an
affair of fancy and luxury:—so it might become the
same some day with buying and selling. Conditions
of society are imaginable in which there will
be no selling and buying, and in which the necessity
for this art will become quite lost; perhaps it may
then happen that individuals who are less subjected
to the law of the prevailing condition of things
will indulge in buying and selling as aluxury of
sentiment. It is then only that commerce would
acquire nobility, and the noble would then perhaps
occupy themselves just as readily with commerce
as they have done hitherto with war and politics:
while on the other hand the valuation of politics
might then have entirely altered. Already even
politics ceases to be the business of a gentleman;
and it is possible that one day it may be found
to be so vulgar as to be brought, like all party
literature and daily literature, under the rubric:
"Prostitution of the intellect."32.Undesirable Disciples.—What shall I do with
these two youths! called out a philosopher
dejectedly, who "corrupted" youths, as Socrates
had once corrupted them,—they are unwelcome
disciples to me. One of them cannot say "Nay,"
and the other says "Half and half" to everything.
Provided they grasped my doctrine, the former
wouldsuffertoo much, for my mode of thinking
requires a martial soul, willingness to cause pain,
delight in denying, and a hard skin,—he would
succumb by open wounds and internal injuries.
And the other will choose the mediocre in everything
he represents, and thus make a mediocrity
of the whole,—I should like my enemy to have such
a disciple.33.Outside the Lecture-room.—"In order to prove
that man after all belongs to the good-natured
animals, I would remind you how credulous he
has been for so long a time. It is now only,
quite late, and after an immense self-conquest, that
he has become adistrustfulanimal,—yes! man is
now more wicked than ever."—I do not understand
this; why should man now be more distrustful and
more wicked?—"Because he now has science,—because
he needs to have it!"—34.Historia abscondita.—Every great man has a
power which operates backward; all history isagain placed on the scales on his account, and a
thousand secrets of the past crawl out of their
lurking-places—intohissunlight. There is absolutely
no knowing what history may be some
day. The past is still perhaps undiscovered in
its essence! There are yet so many retroactive
powers needed!35.Heresy and Witchcraft.—To think otherwise
than is customary—that is by no means so much
the activity of a better intellect, as the activity of
strong, wicked inclinations,—severing, isolating,
refractory, mischief-loving, malicious inclinations.
Heresy is the counterpart of witchcraft, and is
certainly just as little a merely harmless affair,
or a thing worthy of honour in itself. Heretics
and sorcerers are two kinds of bad men; they
have it in common that they also feel themselves
wicked; their unconquerable delight is to attack
and injure whatever rules,—whether it be men or
opinions. The Reformation, a kind of duplication
of the spirit of the Middle Ages at a time when
it had no longer a good conscience, produced both
of these kinds of people in the greatest profusion.36.Last Words.—It will be recollected that the
Emperor Augustus, that terrible man, who had
himself as much in his own power, and who could
be silent as well as any wise Socrates, became
indiscreet about himself in his last words; forthe first time he let his mask fall, when he gave to
understand that he had carried a mask and played
a comedy,—he had played the father of his country
and wisdom on the throne well, even to the point
of illusion!Plaudite amici, comoedia finita est!—The
thought of the dying Nero:qualis artifex pereo!was also the thought of the dying Augustus:
histrionic conceit! histrionic loquacity! And the
very counterpart to the dying Socrates!—But
Tiberius died silently, that most tortured of all
self-torturers,—hewasgenuineand not a stage-player!
What may have passed through his
head in the end! Perhaps this: "Life—that
is a long death. I am a fool, who shortened the
lives of so many! WasIcreated for the purpose
of being a benefactor? I should have given them
eternal life: and then I could haveseen them dyingeternally. I had such good eyesfor that:qualis
spectator pereo!" When he seemed once more
to regain his powers after a long death-struggle,
it was considered advisable to smother him with
pillows,—he died a double death.37.Owing to three Errors.—Science has been furthered
during recent centuries, partly because it was hoped
that God's goodness and wisdom would be best
understood therewith and thereby—the principal
motive in the soul of great Englishmen (like
Newton); partly because the absolute utility of
knowledge was believed in, and especially the most
intimate connection of morality, knowledge, and
happiness—the principal motive in the soul of greatFrenchmen (like Voltaire); and partly because it
was thought that in science there was something
unselfish, harmless, self-sufficing, lovable, and truly
innocent to be had, in which the evil human
impulses did not at all participate—the principal
motive in the soul of Spinoza, who felt himself
divine, as a knowing being:—it is consequently
owing to three errors that science has been
furthered.38.Explosive People.—When one considers how
ready are the forces of young men for discharge,
one does not wonder at seeing them decide so
unfastidiously and with so little selection for this
or that cause:thatwhich attracts them is the
sight of eagerness about any cause, as it were the
sight of the burning match—not the cause itself.
The more ingenious seducers on that account
operate by holding out the prospect of an explosion
to such persons, and do not urge their cause by
means of reasons; these powder-barrels are not
won over by means of reasons!39.Altered Taste.—The alteration of the general
taste is more important than the alteration of
opinions; opinions, with all their proving, refuting,
and intellectual masquerade, are merely symptoms
of altered taste, and are certainlynotwhat they
are still so often claimed to be, the causes of
the altered taste. How does the general taste
alter? By the fact of individuals, the powerfuland influential persons, expressing and tyrannically
enforcing without any feeling of shame,theirhoc
est ridiculum, hoc est absurdum; the decisions, therefore,
of their taste and their disrelish:—they thereby
lay a constraint upon many people, out of which
there gradually grows a habituation for still more,
and finally anecessity for all. The fact, however,
that these individuals feel and "taste" differently,
has usually its origin in a peculiarity of their mode
of life, nourishment, or digestion, perhaps in a
surplus or deficiency of the inorganic salts in their
blood and brain, in short in theirphysis; they
have, however, the courage to avow their physical
constitution, and to lend an ear even to the most
delicate tones of its requirements: their æsthetic
and moral judgments are those "most delicate
tones" of theirphysis.40.The Lack of a noble Presence.—Soldiers and their
leaders have always a much higher mode of comportment
toward one another than workmen and
their employers. At present at least, all militarily
established civilisation still stands high above all
so-called industrial civilisation; the latter, in its
present form, is in general the meanest mode of
existence that has ever been. It is simply the
law of necessity that operates here: people want
to live, and have to sell themselves; but they
despise him who exploits their necessity, andpurchasesthe workman. It is curious that the
subjection to powerful, fear-inspiring, and even
dreadful individuals, to tyrants and leaders ofarmies, is not at all felt so painfully as the subjection
to such undistinguished and uninteresting
persons as the captains of industry; in the employer
the workman usually sees merely a crafty,
blood-sucking dog of a man, speculating on every
necessity, whose name, form, character, and reputation
are altogether indifferent to him. It is probable
that the manufacturers and great magnates
of commerce have hitherto lacked too much all
those forms and attributes of asuperior race, which
alone make persons interesting; if they had had
the nobility of the nobly-born in their looks and
bearing, there would perhaps have been no socialism
in the masses of the people. For these are really
ready forslaveryof every kind, provided that the
superior class above them constantly shows itself
legitimately superior, andbornto command—by its
noble presence! The commonest man feels that
nobility is not to be improvised, and that it is
his part to honour it as the fruit of protracted race-culture,—but
the absence of superior presence, and
the notorious vulgarity of manufacturers with red,
fat hands, brings up the thought to him that it is
only chance and fortune that has here elevated the
one above the other; well then—so he reasons
with himself—letusin our turn tempt chance and
fortune! Let us in our turn throw the dice!—and
socialism commences.41.Against Remorse.—The thinker sees in his
own actions attempts and questionings to obtain
information about something or other; successand failure areanswersto him first and foremost.
To vex himself, however, because something does
not succeed, or to feel remorse at all—he leaves
that to those who act because they are commanded
to do so, and expect to get a beating when their
gracious master is not satisfied with the result.42.Work and Ennui.—In respect to seeking work
for the sake of the pay, almost all men are alike
at present in civilised countries; to all of them
work is a means, and not itself the end; on which
account they are not very select in the choice of the
work, provided it yields an abundant profit. But
still there are rarer men who would rather perish
than work withoutdelightin their labour: the
fastidious people, difficult to satisfy, whose object
is not served by an abundant profit, unless the work
itself be the reward of all rewards. Artists and
contemplative men of all kinds belong to this rare
species of human beings; and also the idlers who
spend their life in hunting and travelling, or in
love affairs and adventures. They all seek toil
and trouble in so far as these are associated with
pleasure, and they want the severest and hardest
labour, if it be necessary. In other respects, however,
they have a resolute indolence, even should
impoverishment, dishonour, and danger to health
and life be associated therewith. They are not so
much afraid of ennui as of labour without pleasure;
indeed they require much ennui, iftheirwork is to
succeed with them. For the thinker and for all
inventive spirits ennui is the unpleasant "calm"of the soul which precedes the happy voyage and
the dancing breezes; he must endure it, he mustawaitthe effect it has on him:—it is preciselythiswhich lesser natures cannot at all experience! It
is common to scare away ennui in every way, just
as it is common to labour without pleasure. It
perhaps distinguishes the Asiatics above the Europeans,
that they are capable of a longer and profounder
repose; even their narcotics operate slowly
and require patience, in contrast to the obnoxious
suddenness of the European poison, alcohol.43.What the Laws Betray.—One makes a great mistake
when one studies the penal laws of a people,
as if they were an expression of its character; the
laws do not betray what a people is, but what
appears to them foreign, strange, monstrous, and
outlandish. The laws concern themselves with the
exceptions to the morality of custom; and the
severest punishments fall on acts which conform to
the customs of the neighbouring peoples. Thus
among the Wahabites, there are only two mortal sins:
having another God than the Wahabite God, and—smoking
(it is designated by them as "the disgraceful
kind of drinking"). "And how is it with regard
to murder and adultery?"—asked the Englishman
with astonishment on learning these things. "Well,
God is gracious and pitiful!" answered the old
chief.—Thus among the ancient Romans there was
the idea that a woman could only sin mortally in
two ways: by adultery on the one hand, and—by
wine-drinking on the other. Old Cato pretendedthat kissing among relatives had only been made
a custom in order to keep women in control on this
point; a kiss meant: did her breath smell of wine?
Wives had actually been punished by death who
were surprised taking wine: and certainly not
merely because women under the influence of wine
sometimes unlearn altogether the art of saying No;
the Romans were afraid above all things of the orgiastic
and Dionysian spirit with which the women
of Southern Europe at that time (when wine
was still new in Europe) were sometimes visited,
as by a monstrous foreignness which subverted
the basis of Roman sentiments; it seemed to
them treason against Rome, as the embodiment
of foreignness.44.The Believed Motive.—However important it may
be to know the motives according to which mankind
has really acted hitherto, perhaps thebeliefin this or that motive, and therefore that which
mankind has assumed and imagined to be the
actual mainspring of its activity hitherto, is something
still more essential for the thinker to know.
For the internal happiness and misery of men
have always come to them through their belief in
this or that motive,—nothowever, through that
which was actually the motive! All about the
latter has an interest of secondary rank.45.Epicurus.—Yes, I am proud of perceiving the
character of Epicurus differently from anyone elseperhaps, and of enjoying the happiness of the
afternoon of antiquity in all that I hear and read
of him:—I see his eye gazing out on a broad
whitish sea, over the shore-rocks on which the
sunshine rests, while great and small creatures play
in its light, secure and calm like this light and that
eye itself. Such happiness could only have been
devised by a chronic sufferer, the happiness of an
eye before which the sea of existence has become
calm, and which can no longer tire of gazing at the
surface and at the variegated, tender, tremulous
skin of this sea. Never previously was there such a
moderation of voluptuousness.46.Our Astonishment.—There is a profound and
fundamental satisfaction in the fact that science
ascertains things thathold their ground, and again
furnish the basis for new researches:—it could
certainly be otherwise. Indeed, we are so much
convinced of all the uncertainty and caprice of our
judgments, and of the everlasting change of all
human laws and conceptions, that we are really
astonishedhow persistentlythe results of science
hold their ground! In earlier times people knew
nothing of this changeability of all human things;
the custom of morality maintained the belief that
the whole inner life of man was bound to iron
necessity by eternal fetters:—perhaps people then
felt a similar voluptuousness of astonishment when
they listened to tales and fairy stories. The
wonderful did so much good to those men, who
might well get tired sometimes of the regular andthe eternal. To leave the ground for once! To
soar! To stray! To be mad!—that belonged to
the paradise and the revelry of earlier times; while
our felicity is like that of the shipwrecked man
who has gone ashore, and places himself with both
feet on the old, firm ground—in astonishment that
it does not rock.47.The Suppression of the Passions.—When one
continually prohibits the expression of the passions
as something to be left to the "vulgar," to coarser,
bourgeois, and peasant natures—that is, when one
does not want to suppress the passions themselves,
but only their language and demeanour, one nevertheless
realisestherewithjust what one does not
want: the suppression of the passions themselves,
or at least their weakening and alteration,—as the
court of Louis XIV. (to cite the most instructive
instance), and all that was dependent on it, experienced.
The generationthat followed, trained
in suppressing their expression, no longer possessed
the passions themselves, but had a pleasant,
superficial, playful disposition in their place,—a
generation which was so permeated with the
incapacity to be ill-mannered, that even an injury
was not taken and retaliated, except with courteous
words. Perhaps our own time furnishes
the most remarkable counterpart to this period:
I see everywhere (in life, in the theatre, and not
least in all that is written) satisfaction at all thecoarseroutbursts and gestures of passion; a certain
convention of passionateness is now desired,—only
not the passion itself! Neverthelessitwill
thereby be at last reached, and our posterity will
have agenuine savagery, and not merely a formal
savagery and unmannerliness.48.Knowledge of Distress.—Perhaps there is nothing
by which men and periods are so much separated
from one another, as by the different degrees of
knowledge of distress which they possess; distress
of the soul as well as of the body. With respect
to the latter, owing to lack of sufficient self-experience,
we men of the present day (in spite
of our deficiencies and infirmities), are perhaps all
of us blunderers and visionaries in comparison
with the men of the age of fear—the longest
of all ages,—when the individual had to protect
himself against violence, and for that purpose
had to be a man of violence himself. At that time
a man went through a long schooling of corporeal
tortures and privations, and found even in a certain
kind of cruelty toward himself, in a voluntary use
of pain, a necessary means for his preservation;
at that time a person trained his environment to
the endurance of pain; at that time a person
willingly inflicted pain, and saw the most frightful
things of this kind happen to others, without
having any other feeling than for his own
security. As regards the distress of the soul,
however, I now look at every man with respect
to whether he knows it by experience or by
description; whether he still regards it as necessary
to simulate this knowledge, perhaps as an indicationof more refined culture; or whether, at the
bottom of his heart, he does not at all believe in
great sorrows of soul, and at the naming of them
has in his mind a similar experience as at the
naming of great corporeal sufferings, such as tooth-aches,
and stomach-aches. It is thus, however,
that it seems to be with most people at present.
Owing to the universal inexperience of both kinds
of pain, and the comparative rarity of the spectacle
of a sufferer, an important consequence results:
people now hate pain far more than earlier man
did, and calumniate it worse than ever; indeed
people nowadays can hardly endure thethoughtof pain, and make out of it an affair of conscience
and a reproach to collective existence.
The appearance of pessimistic philosophies is
not at all the sign of great and dreadful miseries;
for these interrogative marks regarding the worth
of life appear in periods when the refinement
and alleviation of existence already deem the
unavoidable gnat-stings of the soul and body
as altogether too bloody and wicked; and in the
poverty of actual experiences of pain, would now
like to makepainful general ideasappear as
suffering of the worst kind.—There might indeed
be a remedy for pessimistic philosophies and
the excessive sensibility which seems to me the
real "distress of the present":—but perhaps this
remedy already sounds too cruel, and would itself
be reckoned among the symptoms owing to which
people at present conclude that "existence is something
evil." Well! the remedy for "the distress"
isdistress.49.Magnanimity and allied Qualities.—Those paradoxical
phenomena, such as the sudden coldness
in the demeanour of good-natured men, the humour
of the melancholy, and above allmagnanimity, as
a sudden renunciation of revenge or of the gratification
of envy—appear in men in whom there is
a powerful inner impulsiveness, in men of sudden
satiety and sudden disgust. Their satisfactions are
so rapid and violent that satiety, aversion, and
flight into the antithetical taste, immediately follow
upon them: in this contrast the convulsion of
feeling liberates itself, in one person by sudden
coldness, in another by laughter, and in a third
by tears and self-sacrifice. The magnanimous
person appears to me—at least that kind of
magnanimous person who has always made most
impression—as a man with the strongest thirst for
vengeance, to whom a gratification presents itself
close at hand, and whoalreadydrinks it offin
imaginationso copiously, thoroughly, and to the
last drop, that an excessive, rapid disgust follows
this rapid licentiousness;—he now elevates himself
"above himself," as one says, and forgives his
enemy, yea, blesses and honours him. With this
violence done to himself, however, with this mockery
of his impulse to revenge, even still so powerful,
he merely yields to the new impulse, the disgust
which has become powerful, and does this just
as impatiently and licentiously, as a short time
previously heforestalled, and as it were exhausted,
the joy of revenge with his fantasy. In magnanimitythere is the same amount of egoism as in revenge,
but a different quality of egoism.50.The Argument of Isolation.—The reproach of
conscience, even in the most conscientious, is weak
against the feeling: "This and that are contrary
to the good morals ofyoursociety." A cold glance
or a wry mouth, on the part of those among whom
and for whom one has been educated, is stillfearedeven by the strongest. What is really feared there?
Isolation! as the argument which demolishes even
the best arguments for a person or cause!—It is
thus that the gregarious instinct speaks in us.51.Sense for Truth.—Commend me to all scepticism
where I am permitted to answer: "Let us put it to
the test!" But I don't wish to hear anything more
of things and questions which do not admit of being
tested. That is the limit of my "sense for truth":
for bravery has there lost its right.52.What others Know of us.—That which we know
of ourselves and have in our memory is not so
decisive for the happiness of our life as is generally
believed. One day it flashes upon our mind whatothersknow of us (or think they know)—and then
we acknowledge that it is the more powerful. We
get on with our bad conscience more easily than
with our bad reputation.53.Where Goodness Begins.—Where bad eyesight can
no longer see the evil impulse as such, on account
of its refinement,—there man sets up the kingdom
of goodness; and the feeling of having now gone
over into the kingdom of goodness brings all those
impulses (such as the feelings of security, of comfortableness,
of benevolence) into simultaneous
activity, which were threatened and confined by
the evil impulses. Consequently, the duller the eye
so much the further does goodness extend! Hence
the eternal cheerfulness of the populace and of
children! Hence the gloominess and grief (allied
to the bad conscience) of great thinkers.54.The Consciousness of Appearance.—How wonderfully
and novelly, and at the same time how
awfully and ironically, do I feel myself situated
with respect to collective existence, with my knowledge!
I havediscoveredfor myself that the old
humanity and animality, yea, the collective primeval
age, and the past of all sentient being, continues to
meditate, love, hate, and reason in me,—I have
suddenly awoke in the midst of this dream, but
merely to the consciousness that I just dream, and
that Imustdream on in order not to perish; just
as the sleep-walker must dream on in order not to
tumble down. What is it that is now "appearance"
to me! Verily, not the antithesis of any
kind of essence,—what knowledge can I assert of
any kind of essence whatsoever, except merely thepredicates of its appearance! Verily not a dead
mask which one could put upon an unknown X,
and which to be sure one could also remove!
Appearance is for me the operating and living
thing itself; which goes so far in its self-mockery
as to make me feel that here there is appearance,
and Will o' the Wisp, and spirit-dance, and nothing
more,—that among all these dreamers, I also, the
"thinker," dance my dance, that the thinker
is a means of prolonging further the terrestrial
dance, and in so far is one of the masters of
ceremony of existence, and that the sublime consistency
and connectedness of all branches of
knowledge is perhaps, and will perhaps, be the
best means formaintainingthe universality of the
dreaming, the complete, mutual understandability
of all those dreamers, and therebythe duration of
the dream.55.The Ultimate Nobility of Character.—What then
makes a person "noble"? Certainly not that he
makes sacrifices; even the frantic libertine makes
sacrifices. Certainly not that he generally follows
his passions; there are contemptible passions.
Certainly not that he does something for others
and without selfishness; perhaps the effect of
selfishness is precisely at its greatest in the
noblest persons.—But that the passion which
seizes the noble man is a peculiarity, without his
knowing that it is so: the use of a rare and
singular measuring-rod, almost a frenzy: the feeling
of heat in things which feel cold to all otherpersons: a divining of values for which scales have
not yet been invented: a sacrificing on altars which
are consecrated to an unknown God: a bravery
without the desire for honour: a self-sufficiency
which has superabundance, and imparts to men and
things. Hitherto, therefore, it has been the rare
in man, and the unconsciousness of this rareness,
that has made men noble. Here, however, let us
consider that everything ordinary, immediate, and
indispensable, in short, what has been most preservative
of the species, and generally therulein
mankind hitherto, has been judged unreasonable
and calumniated in its entirety by this standard,
in favour of the exceptions. To become the
advocate of the rule—that may perhaps be the
ultimate form and refinement in which nobility of
character will reveal itself on earth.56.The Desire for Suffering.—When I think of the
desire to do something, how it continually tickles
and stimulates millions of young Europeans, who
cannot endure themselves and all their ennui,—I
conceive that there must be a desire in them to
suffer something, in order to derive from their
suffering a worthy motive for acting, for doing
something. Distress is necessary! Hence the cry
of the politicians, hence the many false, trumped-up,
exaggerated "states of distress" of all possible
kinds, and the blind readiness to believe in them.
This young world desires that there should arrive
or appearfrom the outside—not happiness—but
misfortune; and their imagination is alreadybusy beforehand to form a monster out of it, so
that they may afterwards be able to fight with a
monster. If these distress-seekers felt the power
to benefit themselves, to do something for themselves
from internal sources, they would also understand
how to create a distress of their own, specially their
own, from internal sources. Their inventions might
then be more refined, and their gratifications might
sound like good music: while at present they fill
the world with their cries of distress, and consequently
too often with thefeeling of distressin
the first place! They do not know what to make
of themselves—and so they paint the misfortune of
others on the wall; they always need others!
And always again other others!—Pardon me, my
friends, I have ventured to paint myhappinesson
the wall.