BOOK THIRD108.New Struggles.—After Buddha was dead people
showed his shadow for centuries afterwards in a
cave,—an immense frightful shadow. God is dead:
but as the human race is constituted, there will
perhaps be caves for millenniums yet, in which
people will show his shadow,—And we—we have
still to overcome his shadow!109.Let us be on our Guard.—Let us be on our guard
against thinking that the world is a living being.
Where could it extend itself? What could it
nourish itself with? How could it grow and
increase? We know tolerably well what the
organic is; and we are to reinterpret the emphatically
derivative, tardy, rare and accidental, which
we only perceive on the crust of the earth, into the
essential, universal and eternal, as those do who
call the universe an organism? That disgusts me.
Let us now be on our guard against believing that
the universe is a machine; it is assuredly not constructed
with a view tooneend; we invest it with
far too high an honour with the word "machine."
Let us be on our guard against supposing that
anything so methodical as the cyclic motions of
our neighbouring stars obtains generally and
throughout the universe; indeed a glance at theMilky Way induces doubt as to whether there are
not many cruder and more contradictory motions
there, and even stars with continuous, rectilinearly
gravitating orbits, and the like. The astral arrangement
in which we live is an exception; this
arrangement, and the relatively long durability
which is determined by it, has again made possible
the exception of exceptions, the formation of
organic life. The general character of the world,
on the other hand, is to all eternity chaos; not by
the absence of necessity, but in the sense of the
absence of order, structure, form, beauty, wisdom,
and whatever else our æsthetic humanities are
called. Judged by our reason, the unlucky casts
are far oftenest the rule, the exceptions are not the
secret purpose; and the whole musical box repeats
eternally its air, which can never be called a melody,—and
finally the very expression, "unlucky cast"
is already an anthropomorphising which involves
blame. But how could we presume to blame or
praise the universe! Let us be on our guard
against ascribing to it heartlessness and unreason,
or their opposites; it is neither perfect, nor beautiful,
nor noble; nor does it seek to be anything of
the kind, it does not at all attempt to imitate
man! It is altogether unaffected by our æsthetic
and moral judgments! Neither has it any self-preservative
instinct, nor instinct at all; it also
knows no law. Let us be on our guard against
saying that there are laws in nature. There are
only necessities: there is no one who commands,
no one who obeys, no one who transgresses.
When you know that there is no design, you knowalso that there is no chance: for it is only
where there is a world of design that the word
"chance" has a meaning. Let us be on our guard
against saying that death is contrary to life. The
living being is only a species of dead being, and
a very rare species.—Let us be on our guard
against thinking that the world eternally creates
the new. There are no eternally enduring
substances; matter is just another such error as
the God of the Eleatics. But when shall we be at
an end with our foresight and precaution! When
will all these shadows of God cease to obscure us?
When shall we have nature entirely undeified!
When shall we be permitted tonaturaliseourselves
by means of the pure, newly discovered,
newly redeemed nature?110.Origin of Knowledge.—Throughout immense
stretches of time the intellect has produced nothing
but errors; some of them proved to be useful and
preservative of the species: he who fell in with
them, or inherited them, waged the battle for himself
and his offspring with better success. Those
erroneous articles of faith which were successively
transmitted by inheritance, and have finally become
almost the property and stock of the human
species, are, for example, the following:—that there
are enduring things, that there are equal things,
that there are things, substances, and bodies, that
a thing is what it appears, that our will is free,
that what is good for me is also good absolutely.
It was only very late that the deniers anddoubters of such propositions came forward,—it
was only very late that truth made its appearance
as the most impotent form of knowledge. It
seemed as if it were impossible to get along with
truth, our organism was adapted for the very
opposite; all its higher functions, the perceptions
of the senses, and in general every kind of sensation
co-operated with those primevally embodied, fundamental
errors. Moreover, those propositions became
the very standards of knowledge according to which
the "true" and the "false" were determined—throughout
the whole domain of pure logic. Thestrengthof conceptions does not, therefore, depend
on their degree of truth, but on their antiquity,
their embodiment, their character as conditions of
life. Where life and knowledge seemed to conflict,
there has never been serious contention;
denial and doubt have there been regarded
as madness. The exceptional thinkers like the
Eleatics, who, in spite of this, advanced and maintained
the antitheses of the natural errors, believed
that it was possible alsoto livethese counterparts:
it was they who devised the sage as the man
of immutability, impersonality and universality of
intuition, as one and all at the same time, with
a special faculty for that reverse kind of knowledge;
they were of the belief that their knowledge was
at the same time the principle oflife. To be able
to affirm all this, however, they had todeceivethemselves
concerning their own condition: they had
to attribute to themselves impersonality and unchanging
permanence, they had to mistake the
nature of the philosophic individual, deny the forceof the impulses in cognition, and conceive of reason
generally as an entirely free and self-originating
activity; they kept their eyes shut to the fact that
they also had reached their doctrines in contradiction
to valid methods, or through their longing for repose
or for exclusive possession or for domination. The
subtler development of sincerity and of scepticism
finally made these men impossible; their life also
and their judgments turned out to be dependent
on the primeval impulses and fundamental errors
of all sentient being.—The subtler sincerity and
scepticism arose whenever two antithetical maxims
appeared to beapplicableto life, because both of
them were compatible with the fundamental errors;
where, therefore, there could be contention concerning
a higher or lower degree ofutilityfor life;
and likewise where new maxims proved to be, not
in fact useful, but at least not injurious, as expressions
of an intellectual impulse to play a game
that was, like all games, innocent and happy.
The human brain was gradually filled with such
judgments and convictions; and in this tangled
skein there arose ferment, strife and lust for power.
Not only utility and delight, but every kind of
impulse took part in the struggle for "truths": the
intellectual struggle became a business, an attraction,
a calling, a duty, an honour—: cognizing and
striving for the true finally arranged themselves as
needs among other needs. From that moment,
not only belief and conviction, but also examination,
denial, distrust and contradiction becameforces;
all "evil" instincts were subordinated to knowledge,
were placed in its service, and acquired theprestige of the permitted, the honoured, the useful,
and finally the appearance and innocence of thegood. Knowledge, thus became a portion of life
itself, and as life it became a continually growing
power: until finally the cognitions and those
primeval, fundamental, errors clashed with each
other, both as life, both as power, both in the
same man. The thinker is now the being in
whom the impulse to truth and those life-preserving
errors wage their first conflict, now
that the impulse to truth has alsoproveditself
to be a life-preserving power. In comparison with
the importance of this conflict everything else is
indifferent; the final question concerning the conditions
of life is here raised, and the first attempt
is here made to answer it by experiment. How
far is truth susceptible of embodiment?—that is
the question, that is the experiment.111.Origin of the Logical.—Where has logic originated
in men's heads? Undoubtedly out of the
illogical, the domain of which must originally
have been immense. But numberless beings who
reasoned otherwise than we do at present, perished;
albeit that they may have come nearer to truth
than we! Whoever, for example, could not discern
the "like" often enough with regard to food, and
with regard to animals dangerous to him, whoever,
therefore, deduced too slowly, or was too circumspect
in his deductions, had smaller probability of
survival than he who in all similar things immediately
divined the equality. The preponderatinginclination, however, to deal with the similar as
the equal—an illogical inclination, for there is nothing
equal in itself—first created the whole basis
of logic. It was just so (in order that the conception
of substance might originate, this being
indispensable to logic, although in the strictest
sense nothing actual corresponds to it) that for a
long period the changing process in things had to
be overlooked, and remain unperceived; the beings
not seeing correctly had an advantage over those
who saw everything "in flux." In itself every
high degree of circumspection in conclusions, every
sceptical inclination, is a great danger to life. No
living being would have been preserved unless the
contrary inclination—to affirm rather than suspend
judgment, to mistake and fabricate rather than wait,
to assent rather than deny, to decide rather than
be in the right—had been cultivated with extraordinary
assiduity.—The course of logical thought
and reasoning in our modern brain corresponds to
a process and struggle of impulses, which singly
and in themselves are all very illogical and unjust;
we experience usually only the result of the
struggle, so rapidly and secretly does this primitive
mechanism now operate in us.112.Cause and Effect.—We say it is "explanation";
but it is only in "description" that we are in
advance of the older stages of knowledge and
science. We describe better,—we explain just as
little as our predecessors. We have discovered a
manifold succession where the naïve man andinvestigator of older cultures saw only two things,
"cause" and "effect," as it was said; we have perfected
the conception of becoming, but have not
got a knowledge of what is above and behind the
conception. The series of "causes" stands before
us much more complete in every case; we conclude
that this and that must first precede in order that
that other may follow—but we have notgraspedanything thereby. The peculiarity, for example, in
every chemical process seems a "miracle," the same
as before, just like all locomotion; nobody has
"explained" impulse. How could we ever explain!
We operate only with things which do not exist,
with lines, surfaces, bodies, atoms, divisible times,
divisible spaces—how can explanation ever be
possible when we first make everything aconception,
our conception! It is sufficient to regard science
as the exactest humanising of things that is
possible; we always learn to describe ourselves
more accurately by describing things and their
successions. Cause and effect: there is probably
never any such duality; in fact there is acontinuumbefore us, from which we isolate a few portions;—just
as we always observe a motion as isolated
points, and therefore do not properly see it, but
infer it. The abruptness with which many effects
take place leads us into error; it is however only
an abruptness for us. There is an infinite multitude
of processes in that abrupt moment which escape
us. An intellect which could see cause and effect
as acontinuum, which could see the flux of events
not according to our mode of perception, as things
arbitrarily separated and broken—would throw asidethe conception of cause and effect, and would deny
all conditionality.113.The Theory of Poisons.—So many things have
to be united in order that scientific thinking may
arise, and all the necessary powers must have
been devised, exercised, and fostered singly! In
their isolation, however, they have very often had
quite a different effect than at present, when they
are confined within the limits of scientific thinking
and kept mutually in check:—they have operated
as poisons; for example, the doubting impulse, the
denying impulse, the waiting impulse, the collecting
impulse, the disintegrating impulse. Many
hecatombs of men were sacrificed ere these impulses
learned to understand their juxtaposition and
regard themselves as functions of one organising
force in one man! And how far are we still from
the point at which the artistic powers and the practical
wisdom of life shall co-operate with scientific
thinking, so that a higher organic system may be
formed, in relation to which the scholar, the physician,
the artist, and the lawgiver, as we know them
at present, will seem sorry antiquities!114.The Extent of the Moral.—We construct a new
picture, which we see immediately with the aid
of all the old experiences which we have had,always according to the degreeof our honesty and
justice. The only events are moral events, even in
the domain of sense-perception.115.The Four Errors.—Man has been reared by his
errors: firstly, he saw himself always imperfect;
secondly, he attributed to himself imaginary
qualities; thirdly, he felt himself in a false position
in relation to the animals and nature; fourthly, he
always devised new tables of values, and accepted
them for a time as eternal and unconditioned, so
that at one time this, and at another time that
human impulse or state stood first, and was ennobled
in consequence. When one has deducted
the effect of these four errors, one has also deducted
humanity, humaneness, and "human dignity."116.Herd-Instinct.—Wherever we meet with a
morality we find a valuation and order of rank
of the human impulses and activities. These
valuations and orders of rank are always the
expression of the needs of a community or herd:
that which is in the first place toitsadvantage—and
in the second place and third place—is also
the authoritative standard for the worth of every
individual. By morality the individual is taught
to become a function of the herd, and to ascribe to
himself value only as a function. As the conditions
for the maintenance of one community have
been very different from those of another community,
there have been very different moralities;
and in respect to the future essential transformations
of herds and communities, states and societies,
one can prophesy that there will still be very divergentmoralities. Morality is the herd-instinct in
the individual.117.The Herd's Sting of Conscience.—In the longest
and remotest ages of the human race there was
quite a different sting of conscience from that of
the present day. At present one only feels responsible
for what one intends and for what one does,
and we have our pride in ourselves. All our professors
of jurisprudence start with this sentiment
of individual independence and pleasure, as if the
source of right had taken its rise here from the
beginning. But throughout the longest period in
the life of mankind there was nothing more terrible
to a person than to feel himself independent. To
be alone, to feel independent, neither to obey nor
to rule, to represent an individual—that was no
pleasure to a person then, but a punishment; he
was condemned "to be an individual." Freedom
of thought was regarded as discomfort personified.
While we feel law and regulation as constraint and
loss, people formerly regarded egoism as a painful
thing, and a veritable evil. For a person to
be himself, to value himself according to his own
measure and weight—that was then quite distasteful.
The inclination to such a thing would have
been regarded as madness; for all miseries and
terrors were associated with being alone. At that
time the "free will" had bad conscience in close
proximity to it; and the less independently a
person acted, the more the herd-instinct, and not
his personal character, expressed itself in hisconduct, so much the more moral did he esteem
himself. All that did injury to the herd, whether
the individual had intended it or not, then caused
him a sting of conscience—and his neighbour likewise,
indeed the whole herd!—It is in this respect
that we have most changed our mode of thinking.118.Benevolence.—Is it virtuous when a cell transforms
itself into the function of a stronger cell? It
must do so. And is it wicked when the stronger one
assimilates the other? It must do so likewise: it
is necessary, for it has to have abundant indemnity
and seeks to regenerate itself. One has therefore
to distinguish the instinct of appropriation,
and the instinct of submission, in benevolence,
according as the stronger or the weaker feels
benevolent. Gladness and covetousness are united
in the stronger person, who wants to transform
something to his function: gladness and
desire-to-be-coveted in the weaker person, who
would like to become a function.—The former
case is essentially pity, a pleasant excitation of
the instinct of appropriation at the sight of the
weaker: it is to be remembered, however, that
"strong" and "weak" are relative conceptions.119.No Altruism!—I see in many men an excessive
impulse and delight in wanting to be a function;
they strive after it, and have the keenest scent
for all those positions in which preciselytheythemselves can be functions. Among such personsare those women who transform themselves into
just that function of a man that is but weakly
developed in him, and then become his purse, or
his politics, or his social intercourse. Such beings
maintain themselves best when they insert themselves
in an alien organism; if they do not
succeed they become vexed, irritated, and eat
themselves up.120.Health of the Soul.—The favourite medico-moral
formula (whose originator was Ariston of Chios),
"Virtue is the health of the soul," would, at least
in order to be used, have to be altered to this:
"Thy virtue is the health of thy soul." For there
is no such thing as health in itself, and all attempts
to define a thing in that way have lamentably
failed. It is necessary to know thy aim, thy
horizon, thy powers, thy impulses, thy errors, and
especially the ideals and fantasies of thy soul, in
order to determinewhathealth implies even for thybody. There are consequently innumerable kinds of
physical health; and the more one again permits
the unique and unparalleled to raise its head, the
more one unlearns the dogma of the "Equality of
men," so much the more also must the conception
of a normal health, together with a normal diet and
a normal course of disease, be abrogated by our
physicians. And then only would it be time to
turn our thoughts to the health and disease of
thesouland make the special virtue of everyone
consist in its health; but, to be sure, what appeared
as health in one person might appear as the contraryof health in another. In the end the great
question might still remain open: whether we coulddo withoutsickness, even for the development of
our virtue, and whether our thirst for knowledge
and self-knowledge would not especially need the
sickly soul as well as the sound one; in short,
whether the mere will to health is not a prejudice,
a cowardice, and perhaps an instance of the subtlest
barbarism and unprogressiveness.121.Life no Argument.—We have arranged for ourselves
a world in which we can live—by the
postulating of bodies, lines, surfaces, causes and
effects, motion and rest, form and content: without
these articles of faith no one could manage to live
at present! But for all that they are still unproved.
Life is no argument; error might be among the
conditions of life.122.The Element of Moral Scepticism in Christianity.—Christianity
also has made a great contribution
to enlightenment, and has taught moral scepticism
in a very impressive and effective manner—accusing
and embittering, but with untiring
patience and subtlety; it annihilated in every
individual the belief in his virtues: it made the
great virtuous ones, of whom antiquity had no lack,
vanish for ever from the earth, those popular men,
who, in the belief in their perfection, walked about
with the dignity of a hero of the bull-fight. When,
trained in this Christian school of scepticism, wenow read the moral books of the ancients, for
example those of Seneca and Epictetus, we feel
a pleasurable superiority, and are full of secret
insight and penetration,—it seems to us as if a child
talked before an old man, or a pretty, gushing girl
before La Rochefoucauld:—we know better what
virtue is! After all, however, we have applied the
same scepticism to allreligiousstates and processes,
such as sin, repentance, grace, sanctification, &c., and
have allowed the worm to burrow so well, that we
have now the same feeling of subtle superiority and
insight even in reading all Christian books:—we
know also the religious feelings better! And it is
time to know them well and describe them well,
for the pious ones of the old belief die out also;
let us save their likeness and type, at least for the
sake of knowledge.123.Knowledge more than a Means.—Alsowithoutthis passion—I refer to the passion for knowledge—science
would be furthered: science has hitherto
increased and grown up without it. The good
faith in science, the prejudice in its favour, by
which States are at present dominated (it was even
the Church formerly), rests fundamentally on the
fact that the absolute inclination and impulse has
so rarely revealed itself in it, and that science
is regardednotas a passion, but as a condition
and an "ethos." Indeed,amour-plaisirof knowledge
(curiosity) often enough suffices,amour-vanitésuffices, and habituation to it, with the afterthought
of obtaining honour and bread; it even sufficesfor many that they do not know what to do with
a surplus of leisure, except to continue reading,
collecting, arranging, observing and narrating; their
"scientific impulse" is their ennui. Pope Leo X.
once (in the brief to Beroaldus) sang the praise of
science; he designated it as the finest ornament
and the greatest pride of our life, a noble employment
in happiness and in misfortune; "without it,"
he says finally, "all human undertakings would be
without a firm basis,—even with it they are still
sufficiently mutable and insecure!" But this rather
sceptical Pope, like all other ecclesiastical panegyrists
of science, suppressed his ultimate judgment
concerning it. If one may deduce from his
words what is remarkable enough for such a lover
of art, that he places science above art, it is after
all, however, only from politeness that he omits to
speak of that which he places high above all science:
the "revealed truth," and the "eternal salvation of
the soul,"—what are ornament, pride, entertainment
and security of life to him, in comparison thereto?
"Science is something of secondary rank, nothing
ultimate or unconditioned, no object of passion"—this
judgment was kept back in Leo's soul: the
truly Christian judgment concerning science! In
antiquity its dignity and appreciation were lessened
by the fact that, even among its most eager
disciples, the striving aftervirtuestood foremost,
and that people thought they had given the highest
praise to knowledge when they celebrated it as the
best means to virtue. It is something new in
history that knowledge claims to be more than
a means.124.In the Horizon of the Infinite.—We have left the
land and have gone aboard ship! We have broken
down the bridge behind us,—nay, more, the land
behind us! Well, little ship! look out! Beside
thee is the ocean; it is true it does not always
roar, and sometimes it spreads out like silk and
gold and a gentle reverie. But times will come
when thou wilt feel that it is infinite, and that
there is nothing more frightful than infinity. Oh,
the poor bird that felt itself free, and now strikes
against the walls of this cage! Alas, if homesickness
for the land should attack thee, as if there
had been morefreedomthere,—and there is no
"land" any longer!125.The Madman.—Have you ever heard of the
madman who on a bright morning lighted a lantern
and ran to the market-place calling out unceasingly:
"I seek God! I seek God!"—As there were many
people standing about who did not believe in God,
he caused a great deal of amusement. Why! is
he lost? said one. Has he strayed away like a
child? said another. Or does he keep himself
hidden? Is he afraid of us? Has he taken a sea-voyage?
Has he emigrated?—the people cried
out laughingly, all in a hubbub. The insane man
jumped into their midst and transfixed them with
his glances. "Where is God gone?" he called out.
"I mean to tell you!We have killed him,—you
and I! We are all his murderers! But how have
we done it? How were we able to drink up thesea? Who gave us the sponge to wipe away the
whole horizon? What did we do when we loosened
this earth from its sun? Whither does it now
move? Whither do we move? Away from all
suns? Do we not dash on unceasingly? Backwards,
sideways, forwards, in all directions? Is
there still an above and below? Do we not stray,
as through infinite nothingness? Does not empty
space breathe upon us? Has it not become colder?
Does not night come on continually, darker and
darker? Shall we not have to light lanterns in
the morning? Do we not hear the noise of the
grave-diggers who are burying God? Do we not
smell the divine putrefaction?—for even Gods
putrefy! God is dead! God remains dead! And
we have killed him! How shall we console ourselves,
the most murderous of all murderers? The
holiest and the mightiest that the world has hitherto
possessed, has bled to death under our knife,—who
will wipe the blood from us? With what water
could we cleanse ourselves? What lustrums, what
sacred games shall we have to devise? Is not the
magnitude of this deed too great for us? Shall we
not ourselves have to become Gods, merely to seem
worthy of it? There never was a greater event,—and
on account of it, all who are born after us
belong to a higher history than any history
hitherto!"—Here the madman was silent and
looked again at his hearers; they also were silent
and looked at him in surprise. At last he threw
his lantern on the ground, so that it broke in
pieces and was extinguished. "I come too early,"
he then said, "I am not yet at the right time. Thisprodigious event is still on its way, and is travelling,—it
has not yet reached men's ears. Lightning
and thunder need time, the light of the stars needs
time, deeds need time, even after they are done, to
be seen and heard. This deed is as yet further
from them than the furthest star,—and yet they have
done it!"—It is further stated that the madman
made his way into different churches on the same
day, and there intoned hisRequiem aeternam deo.
When led out and called to account, he always gave
the reply: "What are these churches now, if they
are not the tombs and monuments of God?"—126.Mystical Explanations.—Mystical explanations
are regarded as profound; the truth is that they do
not even go the length of being superficial.127.After-Effect of the most Ancient Religiousness.—The
thoughtless man thinks that the Will is the
only thing that operates, that willing is something
simple, manifestly given, underived, and comprehensible
in itself. He is convinced that when he does
anything, for example, when he delivers a blow,
it ishewho strikes, and he has struck because
hewilledto strike. He does not notice anything
of a problem therein, but the feeling ofwillingsuffices to him, not only for the acceptance
of cause and effect, but also for the belief that heunderstandstheir relationship. Of the mechanism
of the occurrence and of the manifold subtle operationsthat must be performed in order that the
blow may result, and likewise of the incapacity
of the Will in itself to effect even the smallest part
of those operations—he knows nothing. The Will
is to him a magically operating force; the belief
in the Will as the cause of effects is the belief in
magically operating forces. In fact, whenever he saw
anything happen, man originally believed in a Will
as cause, and in personallywillingbeings operating
in the background,—the conception of mechanism
was very remote from him. Because, however, man
for immense periods of time believed only in
persons (and not in matter, forces, things, &c.),
the belief in cause and effect has become a fundamental
belief with him, which he applies everywhere
when anything happens,—and even still uses
instinctively as a piece of atavism of remotest origin.
The propositions, "No effect without a cause," and
"Every effect again implies a cause," appear as
generalisations of several less general propositions:—"Where
there is operation there has beenwilling,"
"Operating is only possible onwillingbeings."
"There is never a pure, resultless experience of
activity, but every experience involves stimulation
of the Will" (to activity, defence, revenge or retaliation).
But in the primitive period of the human
race, the latter and the former propositions were
identical, the first were not generalisations of the
second, but the second were explanations of the
first.—Schopenhauer, with his assumption that all
that exists is somethingvolitional, has set a primitive
mythology on the throne; he seems never to
have attempted an analysis of the Will, becausehebelievedlike everybody in the simplicity and
immediateness of all volition:—while volition is
in fact such a cleverly practised mechanical process
that it almost escapes the observing eye. I set the
following propositions against those of Schopenhauer:—Firstly,
in order that Will may arise, an
idea of pleasure and pain is necessary. Secondly,
that a vigorous excitation may be felt as pleasure
or pain, is the affair of theinterpretingintellect,
which, to be sure, operates thereby for the most part
unconsciously to us, and one and the same excitationmaybe interpreted as pleasure or pain. Thirdly,
it is only in an intellectual being that there is
pleasure, displeasure and Will; the immense
majority of organisms have nothing of the kind.128.The Value of Prayer.—Prayer has been devised
for such men as have never any thoughts of their
own, and to whom an elevation of the soul is unknown,
or passes unnoticed; what shall these
people do in holy places and in all important situations
in life which require repose and some kind of
dignity? In order at least that they may notdisturb,
the wisdom of all the founders of religions, the
small as well as the great, has commended to them
the formula of prayer, as a long mechanical labour
of the lips, united with an effort of the memory,
and with a uniform, prescribed attitude of hands
and feet—andeyes! They may then, like the
Tibetans, chew the cud of their "om mane padme
hum," innumerable times, or, as in Benares, count the
name of God Ram-Ram-Ram (and so on, with orwithout grace) on their fingers; or honour Vishnu
with his thousand names of invocation, Allah with
his ninety-nine; or they may make use of the
prayer-wheels and the rosary: the main thing is
that they are settled down for a time at this
work, and present a tolerable appearance; their
mode of prayer is devised for the advantage of
the pious who have thought and elevation of their
own. But even these have their weary hours when
a series of venerable words and sounds and a
mechanical, pious ritual does them good. But supposing
that these rare men—in every religion the
religious man is an exception—know how to help
themselves, the poor in spirit do not know, and
to forbid them the prayer-babbling would mean
to take their religion from them, a fact which
Protestantism brings more and more to light. All
that religion wants with such persons is that they
shouldkeep stillwith their eyes, hands, legs, and
all their organs: they thereby become temporarily
beautified and—more human-looking!129.The Conditions for God.—"God himself cannot
subsist without wise men," said Luther, and with
good reason; but "God can still less subsist without
unwise men,"—good Luther did not say that!130.A Dangerous Resolution.—The Christian resolution
to find the world ugly and bad has made the
world ugly and bad.131.Christianity and Suicide.—Christianity made use
of the excessive longing for suicide at the time of
its origin as a lever for its power: it left only two
forms of suicide, invested them with the highest
dignity and the highest hopes, and forbade all
others in a dreadful manner. But martyrdom and
the slow self-annihilation of the ascetic were
permitted.132.Against Christianity.—It is now no longer our
reason, but our taste that decides against
Christianity.133.Axioms.—An unavoidable hypothesis on which
mankind must always fall back again, is, in the
long run,more powerfulthan the most firmly
believed belief in something untrue (like the
Christian belief). In the long run: that means
a hundred thousand years from now.134.Pessimists as Victims.—When a profound dislike
of existence gets the upper hand, the after-effect
of a great error in diet of which a people has been
long guilty comes to light. The spread of Buddhism
(notits origin) is thus to a considerable extent
dependent on the excessive and almost exclusive
rice-fare of the Indians, and on the universal
enervation that results therefrom. Perhaps the
modern, European discontentedness is to be lookedupon as caused by the fact that the world of our
forefathers, the whole Middle Ages, was given to
drink, owing to the influence of German tastes in
Europe: the Middle Ages, that means the alcoholic
poisoning of Europe.—The German dislike of life
(including the influence of the cellar-air and stove-poison
in German dwellings), is essentially a cold-weather
complaint.135.Origin of Sin.—Sin, as it is at present felt
wherever Christianity prevails or has prevailed, is
a Jewish feeling and a Jewish invention; and in
respect to this background of all Christian morality,
Christianity has in fact aimed at "Judaising" the
whole world. To what an extent this has succeeded
in Europe is traced most accurately in the
extent of our alienness to Greek antiquity—a world
without the feeling of sin—in our sentiments even
at present; in spite of all the good will to approximation
and assimilation, which whole generations
and many distinguished individuals have not
failed to display. "Only when thourepentestis
God gracious to thee"—that would arouse the
laughter or the wrath of a Greek: he would say,
"Slaves may have such sentiments." Here a
mighty being, an almighty being, and yet a revengeful
being, is presupposed; his power is so
great that no injury whatever can be done to him,
except in the point of honour. Every sin is an
infringement of respect, acrimen læsæ majestatis
divinæ—and nothing more! Contrition, degradation,
rolling-in-the-dust,—these are the first andlast conditions on which his favour depends: the
restoration, therefore, of his divine honour! If
injury be caused otherwise by sin, if a profound,
spreading evil be propagated by it, an evil which,
like a disease, attacks and strangles one man after
another—that does not trouble this honour-craving
Oriental in heaven; sin is an offence against him,
not against mankind!—to him on whom he has
bestowed his favour he bestows also this indifference
to the natural consequences of sin. God
and mankind are here thought of as separated,
as so antithetical that sin against the latter cannot
be at all possible,—all deeds are to be looked uponsolely with respect to their supernatural consequences,
and not with respect to their natural results: it is
thus that the Jewish feeling, to which all that is
natural seems unworthy in itself, would have things.
TheGreeks, on the other hand, were more familiar
with the thought that transgression also may have
dignity,—even theft, as in the case of Prometheus,
even the slaughtering of cattle as the expression of
frantic jealousy, as in the case of Ajax; in their
need to attribute dignity to transgression and
embody it therein, they inventedtragedy,—an art
and a delight, which in its profoundest essence
has remained alien to the Jew, in spite of all his
poetic endowment and taste for the sublime.136.The Chosen People.—The Jews, who regard themselves
as the chosen people among the nations, and
that too because they are the moral genius among
the nations (in virtue of their capacity fordespisingthe human in themselvesmorethan any other
people)—the Jews have a pleasure in their divine
monarch and saint similar to that which the French
nobility had in Louis XIV. This nobility had
allowed its power and autocracy to be taken from
it, and had become contemptible: in order not to
feel this, in order to be able to forget it, anunequalledroyal magnificence, royal authority and
plenitude of power was needed, to which there was
access only for the nobility. As in accordance
with this privilege they raised themselves to the
elevation of the court, and from that elevation saw
everything under them,—saw everything contemptible,—they
got beyond all uneasiness of conscience.
They thus elevated intentionally the
tower of the royal power more and more into the
clouds, and set the final coping-stone of their own
power thereon.137.Spoken in Parable.—A Jesus Christ was only
possible in a Jewish landscape—I mean in one
over which the gloomy and sublime thunder-cloud
of the angry Jehovah hung continually. Here only
was the rare, sudden flashing of a single sunbeam
through the dreadful, universal and continuous
nocturnal-day regarded as a miracle of "love,"
as a beam of the most unmerited "grace." Here
only could Christ dream of his rainbow and
celestial ladder on which God descended to man;
everywhere else the clear weather and the sun
were considered the rule and the commonplace.138.The Error of Christ.—The founder of Christianity
thought there was nothing from which men suffered
so much as from their sins:—it was his error, the
error of him who felt himself without sin, to whom
experience was lacking in this respect! It was
thus that his soul filled with that marvellous,
fantastic pity which had reference to a trouble that
even among his own people, the inventors of sin,
was rarely a great trouble! But Christians understood
subsequently how to do justice to their master,
and to sanctify his error into a "truth."139.Colour of the Passions.—Natures such as the
apostle Paul, have an evil eye for the passions;
they learn to know only the filthy, the distorting,
and the heart-breaking in them,—their ideal aim,
therefore, is the annihilation of the passions; in the
divine they see complete purification from passion.
The Greeks, quite otherwise than Paul and the
Jews, directed their ideal aim precisely to the
passions, and loved, elevated, embellished and deified
them: in passion they evidently not only felt themselves
happier, but also purer and diviner than
otherwise.—And now the Christians? Have they
wished to become Jews in this respect? Have
they perhaps become Jews!140.Too Jewish.—If God had wanted to become an
object of love, he would first of all have had toforgo judging and justice:—a judge, and even a
gracious judge, is no object of love. The founder
of Christianity showed too little of the finer feelings
in this respect—being a Jew.141.Too Oriental.—What? A God who loves men,
provided that they believe in him, and who hurls
frightful glances and threatenings at him who does
not believe in this love! What? A conditioned
love as the feeling of an almighty God! A love
which has not even become master of the sentiment
of honour and of the irritable desire for vengeance!
How Oriental is all that! "If I love thee, what does
it concern thee?"[9]is already a sufficient criticism
of the whole of Christianity.142.Frankincense.—Buddha says: "Do not flatter
thy benefactor!" Let one repeat this saying in a
Christian church:—it immediately purifies the air
of all Christianity.143.The Greatest Utility of Polytheism.—For the
individual to set up hisownideal and derive from
it his laws, his pleasures and his rights—thathas
perhaps been hitherto regarded as the most monstrous
of all human aberrations, and as idolatry in
itself; in fact, the few who have ventured to do this
have always needed to apologise to themselves,usually in this wise: "Not I! not I! buta God,
through my instrumentality!" It was in the marvellous
art and capacity for creating Gods—in polytheism—that
this impulse was permitted to discharge
itself, it was here that it became purified, perfected,
and ennobled; for it was originally a commonplace
and unimportant impulse, akin to stubbornness, disobedience
and envy. To behostileto this impulse
towards the individual ideal,—that was formerly the
law of every morality. There was then only one
norm, "the man"—and every people believed that
ithadthis one and ultimate norm. But above
himself, and outside of himself, in a distant over-world,
a person could see amultitude of norms: the
one God was not the denial or blasphemy of the
other Gods! It was here that individuals were first
permitted, it was here that the right of individuals
was first respected. The inventing of Gods, heroes
and supermen of all kinds, as well as co-ordinate
men and undermen—dwarfs, fairies, centaurs,
satyrs, demons, devils—was the inestimable preliminary
to the justification of the selfishness
and sovereignty of the individual: the freedom
which was granted to one God in respect to other
Gods, was at last given to the individual himself
in respect to laws, customs and neighbours.
Monotheism, on the contrary, the rigid consequence
of the doctrine of one normal human being—consequently
the belief in a normal God, beside whom
there are only false, spurious Gods—has perhaps
been the greatest danger of mankind in the past:
man was then threatened by that premature state
of inertia, which, so far as we can see, most of theother species of animals reached long ago, as
creatures who all believe in one normal animal
and ideal in their species, and definitely translated
their morality of custom into flesh and blood.
In polytheism man's free-thinking and many-sided
thinking had a prototype set up: the power to
create for himself new and individual eyes, always
newer and more individualised: so that it is for
man alone, of all the animals, that there are noeternalhorizons and perspectives.144.Religious Wars.—The greatest advance of the
masses hitherto has been religious war, for it proves
that the masses have begun to deal reverently with
conceptions of things. Religious wars only result,
when human reason generally has been refined by
the subtle disputes of sects; so that even the populace
becomes punctilious and regards trifles as
important, actually thinking it possible that the
"eternal salvation of the soul" may depend upon
minute distinctions of concepts.145.Danger of Vegetarians.—The immense prevalence
of rice-eating impels to the use of opium
and narcotics, in like manner as the immense
prevalence of potato-eating impels to the use
of brandy:—it also impels, however, in its more
subtle after-effects to modes of thought and feeling
which operate narcotically. This is in accord with
the fact that those who promote narcotic modes of
thought and feeling, like those Indian teachers,praise a purely vegetable diet, and would like to
make it a law for the masses: they want thereby
to call forth and augment the need whichtheyare
in a position to satisfy.146.German Hopes.—Do not let us forget that
the names of peoples are generally names of
reproach. The Tartars, for example, according
to their name, are "the dogs"; they were
so christened by the Chinese. "Deutschen"
(Germans) means originally "heathen": it is thus
that the Goths after their conversion named
the great mass of their unbaptized fellow-tribes,
according to the indication in their translation
of the Septuagint, in which the heathen are
designated by the word which in Greek signifies
"the nations." (See Ulfilas.)—It might still be possible
for the Germans to make an honourable name
ultimately out of their old name of reproach, by
becoming the firstnon-Christiannation of Europe;
for which purpose Schopenhauer, to their honour,
regarded them as highly qualified. The work ofLutherwould thus be consummated,—he who
taught them to be anti-Roman and to say: "HereIstand!Icannot do otherwise!"—147.Question and Answer.—What do savage tribes
at present accept first of all from Europeans?
Brandy and Christianity, the European narcotics.—And
by what means are they fastest ruined?—By
the European narcotics.