BOOK FOURTHSANCTUS JANUARIUSThou who with cleaving fiery lancesThe stream of my soul from its ice dost free,Till with a rush and a roar it advancesTo enter with glorious hoping the sea:Brighter to see and purer ever,Free in the bonds of thy sweet constraint,—So it praises thy wondrous endeavour,January, thou beauteous saint!Genoa, January 1882.276.For the New Year.—I still live, I still think; I
must still live, for I must still think.Sum, ergo
cogito: cogito, ergo sum.To-day everyone takes
the liberty of expressing his wish and his favourite
thought: well, I also mean to tell what I have
wished for myself to-day, and what thought first
crossed my mind this year,—a thought which ought
to be the basis, the pledge and the sweetening of
all my future life! I want more and more to
perceive the necessary characters in things as the
beautiful:—I shall thus be one of those who
beautify things.Amor fati: let that henceforth
be my love! I do not want to wage war with the
ugly. I do not want to accuse, I do not want even
to accuse the accusers.Looking aside, let that be
my sole negation! And all in all, to sum up: I
wish to be at any time hereafter only a yea-sayer!277.Personal Providence.—There is a certain climax
in life, at which, notwithstanding all our freedom,
and however much we may have denied all directing
reason and goodness in the beautiful chaos
of existence, we are once more in great danger
of intellectual bondage, and have to face ourhardest test. For now the thought of a personal
Providence first presents itself before us with
its most persuasive force, and has the best of
advocates, apparentness, in its favour, now when it
is obvious that all and everything that happens to
us alwaysturns out for the best. The life of every
day and of every hour seems to be anxious for
nothing else but always to prove this proposition
anew; let it be what it will, bad or good weather,
the loss of a friend, a sickness, a calumny, the
non-receipt of a letter, the spraining of one's
foot, a glance into a shop-window, a counter-argument,
the opening of a book, a dream, a
deception:—it shows itself immediately, or very
soon afterwards as something "not permitted to
be absent,"—it is full of profound significance and
utility preciselyfor us! Is there a more dangerous
temptation to rid ourselves of the belief in the
Gods of Epicurus, those careless, unknown Gods,
and believe in some anxious and mean Divinity,
who knows personally every little hair on our
heads, and feels no disgust in rendering the most
wretched services? Well—I mean in spite of all
this! we want to leave the Gods alone (and the
serviceable genii likewise), and wish to content
ourselves with the assumption that our own
practical and theoretical skilfulness in explaining
and suitably arranging events has now reached its
highest point. We do not want either to think
too highly of this dexterity of our wisdom, when
the wonderful harmony which results from playing
on our instrument sometimes surprises us
too much: a harmony which sounds too well forus to dare to ascribe it to ourselves. In fact, now
and then there is one who playswithus—beloved
Chance: he leads our hand occasionally, and even
the all-wisest Providence could not devise any finer
music than that of which our foolish hand is then
capable.278.The Thought of Death.—It gives me a melancholy
happiness to live in the midst of this confusion of
streets, of necessities, of voices: how much enjoyment,
impatience and desire, how much thirsty
life and drunkenness of life comes to light here
every moment! And yet it will soon be so still
for all these shouting, lively, life-loving people!
How everyone's shadow, his gloomy travelling-companion
stands behind him! It is always as in
the last moment before the departure of an emigrant-ship:
people have more than ever to say to
one another, the hour presses, the ocean with its
lonely silence waits impatiently behind all the
noise—so greedy, so certain of its prey! And all,
all, suppose that the past has been nothing, or a
small matter, that the near future is everything:
hence this haste, this crying, this self-deafening
and self-overreaching! Everyone wants to be
foremost in this future,—and yet death and the
stillness of death are the only things certain and
common to all in this future! How strange that this
sole thing that is certain and common to all, exercises
almost no influence on men, and that they are thefurthestfrom regarding themselves as the brotherhood
of death! It makes me happy to see thatmen do not want to think at all of the idea of death!
I would fain do something to make the idea of life
even a hundred timesmore worthy of their attention.279.Stellar Friendship.—We were friends, and have
become strangers to each other. But this is as it
ought to be, and we do not want either to conceal
or obscure the fact, as if we had to be ashamed of
it. We are two ships, each of which has its goal
and its course; we may, to be sure, cross one
another in our paths, and celebrate a feast together
as we did before,—and then the gallant ships lay
quietly in one harbour, and in one sunshine, so
that it might have been thought they were
already at their goal, and that they had had one
goal. But then the almighty strength of our tasks
forced us apart once more into different seas and
into different zones, and perhaps we shall never
see one another again,—or perhaps we may see
one another, but not know one another again; the
different seas and suns have altered us! That we
had to become strangers to one another is the law
to which we aresubject: just by that shall we
become more sacred to one another! Just by
that shall the thought of our former friendship
become holier! There is probably some immense,
invisible curve and stellar orbit in which our
courses and goals, so widely different, may becomprehendedas small stages of the way,—let us
raise ourselves to this thought! But our life is
too short, and our power of vision too limited forus to be more than friends in the sense of that
sublime possibility.—And so we willbelievein our
stellar friendship, though we should have to be
terrestrial enemies to one another.280.Architecture for Thinkers.—An insight is needed
(and that probably very soon) as to what is specially
lacking in our great cities—namely, quiet, spacious,
and widely extended places for reflection, places with
long, lofty colonnades for bad weather, or for too
sunny days, where no noise of wagons or of shouters
would penetrate, and where a more refined propriety
would prohibit loud praying even to the priest:
buildings and situations which as a whole would
express the sublimity of self-communion and
seclusion from the world. The time is past when
the Church possessed the monopoly of reflection,
when thevita contemplativahad always in the first
place to be thevita religiosa: and everything that
the Church has built expresses this thought. I
know not how we could content ourselves with
their structures, even if they should be divested
of their ecclesiastical purposes: these structures
speak a far too pathetic and too biassed speech, as
houses of God and places of splendour for supernatural
intercourse, for us godless ones to be able
to thinkour thoughtsin them. We want to haveourselvestranslated into stone and plant, we want
to go for a walk inourselveswhen we wander in
these halls and gardens.281.Knowing how to Find the End.—Masters of the
first rank are recognised by knowing in a perfect
manner how to find the end, in the whole as well
as in the part; be it the end of a melody or of a
thought, be it the fifth act of a tragedy or of a state
affair. The masters of the second degree always
become restless towards the end, and seldom dip
down into the sea with such proud, quiet equilibrium
as, for example, the mountain-ridge atPorto fino—where
the Bay of Genoa sings its melody to an end.282.The Gait.—There are mannerisms of the intellect
by which even great minds betray that they
originate from the populace, or from the semi-populace:—it
is principally the gait and step
of their thoughts which betray them; they cannotwalk. It was thus that even Napoleon, to his
profound chagrin, could not walk "legitimately"
and in princely fashion on occasions when it was
necessary to do so properly, as in great coronation
processions and on similar occasions: even there he
was always just the leader of a column—proud and
brusque at the same time, and very self-conscious
of it all.—It is something laughable to see those
writers who make the folding robes of their periods
rustle around them: they want to cover theirfeet.283.Pioneers.—I greet all the signs indicating that a
more manly and warlike age is commencing, which
will, above all, bring heroism again into honour!For it has to prepare the way for a yet higher age,
and gather the force which the latter will one day
require,—the age which will carry heroism into knowledge,
andwage warfor the sake of ideas and their
consequences. For that end many brave pioneers
are now needed, who, however, cannot originate out
of nothing,—and just as little out of the sand and
slime of present-day civilisation and the culture of
great cities: men silent, solitary and resolute, who
know how to be content and persistent in invisible
activity: men who with innate disposition seek in all
things that which isto be overcomein them: men to
whom cheerfulness, patience, simplicity, and contempt
of the great vanities belong just as much as
do magnanimity in victory and indulgence to the
trivial vanities of all the vanquished: men with
an acute and independent judgment regarding all
victors, and concerning the part which chance has
played in the winning of victory and fame: men
with their own holidays, their own work-days, and
their own periods of mourning; accustomed to
command with perfect assurance, and equally ready,
if need be, to obey, proud in the one case as in the
other, equally serving their own interests: men
more imperilled, more productive, more happy!
For believe me!—the secret of realising the largest
productivity and the greatest enjoyment of existence
isto live in danger! Build your cities on the slope
of Vesuvius! Send your ships into unexplored
seas! Live in war with your equals and with
yourselves! Be robbers and spoilers, ye knowing
ones, as long as ye cannot be rulers and
possessor! The time will soon pass when youcan be satisfied to live like timorous deer concealed
in the forests. Knowledge will finally stretch out
her hand for that which belongs to her:—she means
toruleandpossess, and you with her!284.Belief in Oneself.—In general, few men have
belief in themselves:—and of those few some are
endowed with it as a useful blindness or partial
obscuration of intellect (what would they perceive
if they could seeto the bottom of themselves!).
The others must first acquire the belief for themselves:
everything good, clever, or great that they
do, is first of all an argument against the sceptic
that dwells in them: the question is how to convince
or persuadethis sceptic, and for that purpose
genius almost is needed. They are signally dissatisfied
with themselves.285.Excelsior!—"Thou wilt never more pray, never
more worship, never more repose in infinite trust—thou
refusest to stand still and dismiss thy thoughts
before an ultimate wisdom, an ultimate virtue, an
ultimate power,—thou hast no constant guardian
and friend in thy seven solitudes—thou livest
without the outlook on a mountain that has snow
on its head and fire in its heart—there is no
longer any requiter for thee, nor any amender with
his finishing touch—there is no longer any reason
in that which happens, or any love in that which
will happen to thee—there is no longer any resting-place
for thy weary heart, where it has only to findand no longer to seek, thou art opposed to any kind
of ultimate peace, thou desirest the eternal recurrence
of war and peace:—man of renunciation,
wilt thou renounce in all these things? Who
will give thee the strength to do so? No one has
yet had this strength!"—There is a lake which one
day refused to flow away, and threw up a dam at
the place where it had hitherto flowed away: since
then this lake has always risen higher and higher.
Perhaps the very renunciation will also furnish us
with the strength with which the renunciation itself
can be borne; perhaps man will ever rise higher
and higher from that point onward, when he no
longerflows outinto a God.286.A Digression.—Here are hopes; but what will
you see and hear of them, if you have not experienced
glance and glow and dawn of day in your
own souls? I can only suggest—I cannot do more!
To move the stones, to make animals men—would
you have me do that? Alas, if you are yet stones
and animals, seek first your Orpheus!287.Love of Blindness.—"My thoughts," said the
wanderer to his shadow, "ought to show me where
I stand, but they should not betray to mewhither I
go. I love ignorance of the future, and do not
want to come to grief by impatience and anticipatory
tasting of promised things."288.Lofty Moods.—It seems to me that most men do
not believe in lofty moods, unless it be for the
moment, or at the most for a quarter of an hour,—except
the few who know by experience a longer
duration of high feeling. But to be absolutely
a man with a single lofty feeling, the incarnation of
a single lofty mood—that has hitherto been only a
dream and an enchanting possibility: history does
not yet give us any trustworthy example of it.
Nevertheless it could some day produce such men
also—when a multitude of favourable conditions
have been created and established, which at
present even the happiest chance is unable to
throw together. Perhaps that very state which has
hitherto entered into our soul as an exception, felt
with horror now and then, may be the usual condition
of those future souls: a continuous movement
between high and low, and the feeling of high and
low, a constant state of mounting as on steps, and
at the same time reposing as on clouds.289.Aboard Ship!—When one considers how a full
philosophical justification of his mode of living
and thinking operates upon every individual—namely,
as a warming, blessing, and fructifying
sun, specially shining on him; how it makes him
independent of praise and blame, self-sufficient,
rich and generous in the bestowal of happiness
and kindness; how it unceasingly transforms the
evil to the good, brings all the energies to bloomand maturity, and altogether hinders the growth
of the greater and lesser weeds of chagrin and discontent:—one
at last cries out importunately: Oh,
that many such new suns were created! The evil
man, also, the unfortunate man, and the exceptional
man, shall each have his philosophy, his
rights, and his sunshine! It is not sympathy with
them that is necessary!—we must unlearn this
arrogant fancy, notwithstanding that humanity
has so long learned it and used it exclusively—we
have not to set up any confessor, exorcist, or
pardoner for them! It is a newjustice, however,
that is necessary! And a new solution! And
new philosophers! The moral earth also is round!
The moral earth also has its antipodes! The antipodes
also have their right to exist! there is
still another world to discover—and more than
one! Aboard ship! ye philosophers!290.One Thing is Needful.—To "give style" to one's
character—that is a grand and a rare art! He
who surveys all that his nature presents in its
strength and in its weakness, and then fashions it
into an ingenious plan, until everything appears
artistic and rational, and even the weaknesses
enchant the eye—exercises that admirable art.
Here there has been a great amount of second
nature added, there a portion of first nature has
been taken away:—in both cases with long exercise
and daily labour at the task. Here the ugly,
which does not permit of being taken away, has
been concealed, there it has been re-interpretedinto the sublime. Much of the vague, which refuses
to take form, has been reserved and utilised
for the perspectives:—it is meant to give a hint
of the remote and immeasurable. In the end,
when the work has been completed, it is revealed
how it was the constraint of the same taste that
organised and fashioned it in whole or in part:
whether the taste was good or bad is of less
importance than one thinks,—it is sufficient that
it wasa taste!—It will be the strong imperious
natures which experience their most refined joy
in such constraint, in such confinement and perfection
under their own law; the passion of their
violent volition lessens at the sight of all disciplined
nature, all conquered and ministering nature: even
when they have palaces to build and gardens to
lay out, it is not to their taste to allow nature to
be free.—It is the reverse with weak characters
who have not power over themselves, andhatethe restriction of style: they feel that if this
repugnant constraint were laid upon them, they
would necessarily becomevulgarisedunder it:
they become slaves as soon as they serve, they
hate service. Such intellects—they may be intellects
of the first rank—are always concerned with
fashioning or interpreting themselves and their
surroundings asfreenature—wild, arbitrary, fantastic,
confused and surprising: and it is well for
them to do so, because only in this manner can
they please themselves! For one thing is needful:
namely, that man shouldattain tosatisfaction with
himself—be it but through this or that fable and
artifice: it is only then that man's aspect is at allendurable! He who is dissatisfied with himself is
ever ready to avenge himself on that account: we
others will be his victims, if only in having always
to endure his ugly aspect. For the aspect of the
ugly makes one mean and sad.291.Genoa.—I have looked upon this city, its villas
and pleasure-grounds and the wide circuit of its
inhabited heights and slopes, for a considerable
time: in the end I must say that I seecountenancesout of past generations,—this district is strewn with
the images of bold and autocratic men. They havelivedand have wanted to live on—they say so
with their houses, built and decorated for centuries,
and not for the passing hour: they were well
disposed to life, however ill-disposed they may
often have been towards themselves. I always see
the builder, how he casts his eye on all that is
built around him far and near, and likewise on
the city, the sea, and the chain of mountains; how
he expresses power and conquest in his gaze:
all this he wishes to fit intohisplan, and in the
end make it hisproperty, by its becoming a
portion of the same. The whole district is overgrown
with this superb, insatiable egoism of the
desire to possess and exploit; and as these men
when abroad recognised no frontiers, and in their
thirst for the new placed a new world beside the
old, so also at home everyone rose up against
everyone else, and devised some mode of expressing
his superiority, and of placing between himself and
his neighbour his personal illimitableness. Everyonewon for himself his home once more by over-powering
it with his architectural thoughts, and
by transforming it into a delightful sight for his
race. When we consider the mode of building
cities in the north, the law and the general delight
in legality and obedience, impose upon us: we
thereby divine the propensity to equality and
submission which must have ruled in those builders.
Here, however, on turning every corner you find
a man by himself, who knows the sea, knows adventure,
and knows the Orient, a man who is averse
to law and to neighbour, as if it bored him to
have to do with them, a man who scans all that
is already old and established, with envious glances:
with a wonderful craftiness of fantasy, he would
like, at least in thought, to establish all this anew,
to lay his hand upon it, and introduce his meaning
into it—if only for the passing hour of a sunny
afternoon, when for once his insatiable and melancholy
soul feels satiety, and when only what is his
own, and nothing strange, may show itself to
his eye.292.To the Preachers of Morality.—I do not mean
to moralise, but to those who do, I would give this
advice: if you mean ultimately to deprive the best
things and the best conditions of all honour and
worth, continue to speak of them in the same
way as heretofore! Put them at the head of your
morality, and speak from morning till night of the
happiness of virtue, of repose of soul, of righteousness,
and of reward and punishment in the nature
of things: according as you go on in this manner,all these good things will finally acquire a popularity
and a street-cry for themselves: but then
all the gold on them will also be worn off, and
more besides: all the goldin themwill have
changed into lead. Truly, you understand the
reverse art of alchemy, the depreciating of the
most valuable things! Try, just for once, another
recipe, in order not to realise as hitherto the
opposite of what you mean to attain:denythose
good things, withdraw from them the applause of
the populace and discourage the spread of them,
make them once more the concealed chastities of
solitary souls, say thatmorality is something forbidden!
Perhaps you will thus win over for those
things the sort of men who are only of any account,
I mean theheroic. But then there must be
something formidable in them, and not as hitherto
something disgusting! Might one not be inclined
to say at present with reference to morality
what Master Eckardt says: "I pray God to deliver
me from God!"293.Our Atmosphere.—We know it well: to him who
only casts a glance now and then at science, as
in taking a walk (in the manner of women, and
alas! also like many artists), the strictness in its
service, its inexorability in small matters as well
as in great, its rapidity in weighing, judging and
condemning, produce something of a feeling of
giddiness and fright. It is especially terrifying to
him that the hardest is here demanded, that the
best is done without the reward of praise or distinction;
it is rather as among soldiers—almostnothing but blame and sharp reprimandis heard;
for doing well prevails here as the rule, doing ill
as the exception; the rule, however, has, here as
everywhere, a silent tongue. It is the same with
this "severity of science" as with the manners and
politeness of the best society: it frightens the
uninitiated. He, however, who is accustomed to it,
does not like to live anywhere but in this clear,
transparent, powerful, and highly electrified atmosphere,
thismanlyatmosphere. Anywhere else
it is not pure and airy enough for him: he suspects
thattherehis best art would neither be properly
advantageous to anyone else, nor a delight to
himself, that through misunderstandings half of
his life would slip through his fingers, that much
foresight, much concealment, and reticence would
constantly be necessary,—nothing but great and
useless losses of power! Inthiskeen and clear
element, however, he has his entire power: here he
can fly! Why should he again go down into those
muddy waters where he has to swim and wade and
soil his wings!—No! There it is too hard for us
to live! we cannot help it that we are born for the
atmosphere, the pure atmosphere, we rivals of the
ray of light; and that we should like best to ride
like it on the atoms of ether, not away from the
sun, buttowards the sun! That, however, we
cannot do:—so we want to do the only thing that
is in our power: namely, to bring light to the earth,
we want to be "the light of the earth!" And for
that purpose we have our wings and our swiftness
and our severity, on that account we are manly, and
even terrible like the fire. Let those fear us, whodo not know how to warm and brighten themselves
by our influence!294.Against the Disparagers of Nature.—They are
disagreeable to me, those men in whom every
natural inclination forthwith becomes a disease,
something disfiguring, or even disgraceful.Theyhave seduced us to the opinion that the inclinations
and impulses of men are evil;theyare the cause
of our great injustice to our own nature, and to all
nature! There are enough of men whomayyield
to their impulses gracefully and carelessly: but
they do not do so, for fear of that imaginary "evil
thing" in nature!That is the causewhy there is
so little nobility to be found among men: the
indication of which will always be to have no fear
of oneself, to expect nothing disgraceful from
oneself, to fly without hesitation whithersoever we
are impelled—we free-born birds! Wherever we
come, there will always be freedom and sunshine
around us.295.Short-lived Habits.—I love short-lived habits,
and regard them as an invaluable means for
getting a knowledge ofmanythings and various
conditions, to the very bottom of their sweetness
and bitterness; my nature is altogether arranged
for short-lived habits, even in the needs of its
bodily health, and in general,as far asI can see,
from the lowest up to the highest matters. I
always think thatthiswill at last satisfy me
permanently (the short-lived habit has also thatcharacteristic belief of passion, the belief in everlasting
duration; I am to be envied for having
found it and recognised it), and then it nourishes
me at noon and at eve, and spreads a profound
satisfaction around me and in me, so that I have
no longing for anything else, not needing to
compare, or despise, or hate. But one day the
habit has had its time: the good thing separates
from me, not as something which then inspires
disgust in me—but peaceably and as though satisfied
with me, as I am with it; as if we had to be
mutually thankful, andthusshook hands for
farewell. And already the new habit waits at the
door, and similarly also my belief—indestructible
fool and sage that I am!—that this new habit will
be the right one, the ultimate right one. So it is
with me as regards foods, thoughts, men, cities,
poems, music, doctrines, arrangements of the day,
and modes of life.—On the other hand, I hatepermanenthabits, and feel as if a tyrant came
into my neighbourhood, and as if my life's breathcondensed, when events take such a form that permanent
habits seem necessarily to grow out of them:
for example, through an official position, through
constant companionship with the same persons,
through a settled abode, or through a uniform state
of health. Indeed, from the bottom of my soul I
am gratefully disposed to all my misery and sickness,
and to whatever is imperfect in me, because such
things leave me a hundred back-doors through which
I can escape from permanent habits. The most
unendurable thing, to be sure, the really terrible
thing, would be a life without habits, a life whichcontinually required improvisation:—that would
be my banishment and my Siberia.296.A Fixed Reputation.—A fixed reputation was
formerly a matter of the very greatest utility; and
wherever society continues to be ruled by the
herd-instinct, it is still most suitable for every
individualto giveto his character and businessthe appearanceof unalterableness,—even when they
are not so in reality. "One can rely on him, he
remains the same"—that is the praise which has
most significance in all dangerous conditions of
society. Society feels with satisfaction that it
has a reliabletoolready at all times in the
virtue of this one, in the ambition of that one, and
in the reflection and passion of a third one,—it
honours thistool-like nature, this self-constancy,
this unchangeableness in opinions, efforts, and
even in faults, with the highest honours. Such
a valuation, which prevails and has prevailed
everywhere simultaneously with the morality of
custom, educates "characters," and brings all
changing, re-learning, and self-transforming intodisrepute. Be the advantage of this mode of
thinking ever so great otherwise, it is in any case
the mode of judging which is most injuriousto
knowledge: for precisely the good-will of the knowing
one ever to declare himself unhesitatingly asopposedto his former opinions, and in general to
be distrustful of all that wants to be fixed in him—is
here condemned and brought into disrepute.
The disposition of the thinker, as incompatible witha "fixed reputation," is regarded asdishonourable,
while the petrifaction of opinions has all the honour
to itself:—we have at present still to live under the
interdict of such rules! How difficult it is to live
when one feels that the judgment of many millenniums
is around one and against one. It is probable
that for many millenniums knowledge was
afflicted with a bad conscience, and that there must
have been much self-contempt and secret misery in
the history of the greatest intellects.297.Ability to Contradict.—Everyone knows at present
that the ability to endure contradiction is a high
indication of culture. Some people even know
that the higher man courts opposition, and provokes
it, so as to get a cue to his hitherto unknown partiality.
But theabilityto contradict, the attainment
ofgoodconscience in hostility to the accustomed,
the traditional and the hallowed,—that is more than
both the above-named abilities, and is the really
great, new and astonishing thing in our culture, the
step of all steps of the emancipated intellect: who
knows that?—298.A Sigh.—I caught this notion on the way, and
rapidly took the readiest, poor words to hold it fast,
so that it might not again fly away. And now it
has died in these dry words, and hangs and flaps
about in them—and I hardly know now, when I
look upon it, how I could have had such happiness
when I caught this bird.299.What one should Learn from Artists.—What
means have we for making things beautiful, attractive,
and desirable, when they are not so?—and
I suppose they are never so in themselves!
We have here something to learn from physicians,
when, for example, they dilute what is bitter, or
put wine and sugar into their mixing-bowl; but we
have still more to learn from artists, who in fact,
are continually concerned in devising such inventions
and artifices. To withdraw from things
until one no longer sees much of them, until one
has even to see things into them,in order to see
them at all—or to view them from the side, and
as in a frame—or to place them so that they
partly disguise themselves and only permit of
perspective views—or to look at them through
coloured glasses, or in the light of the sunset—or
to furnish them with a surface or skin which is not
fully transparent: we should learn all that from
artists, and moreover be wiser than they. For
this fine power of theirs usually ceases with them
where art ceases and life begins;we, however, want
to be the poets of our life, and first of all in the
smallest and most commonplace matters.300.Prelude to Science.—Do you believe then that
the sciences would have arisen and grown up if
the sorcerers, alchemists, astrologers and witches
had not been their forerunners; those who, with
their promisings and foreshadowings, had first tocreate a thirst, a hunger, and a taste forhidden and
forbiddenpowers? Yea, that infinitely more had
to bepromisedthan could ever be fulfilled, in order
that something might be fulfilled in the domain of
knowledge? Perhaps the whole ofreligion, also,
may appear to some distant age as an exercise and
a prelude, in like manner as the prelude and preparation
of science here exhibit themselves, thoughnotat all practised and regarded as such. Perhaps
religion may have been the peculiar means for
enabling individual men to enjoy but once the
entire self-satisfaction of a God and all his self-redeeming
power. Indeed!—one may ask—would
man have learned at all to get on the tracks of
hunger and thirst forhimself, and to extract satiety
and fullness out ofhimself, without that religious
schooling and preliminary history? Had Prometheus
first tofancythat he hadstolenthe light, and
that he did penance for the theft—in order finally
to discover that he had created the light,in that he
had longed for the light, and that not only man, but
alsoGodhad been the work ofhishands and the
clay in his hands? All mere creations of the
creator?—just as the illusion, the theft, the Caucasus,
the vulture, and the whole tragic Prometheia of all
thinkers!301.Illusion of the Contemplative.—Higher men are
distinguished from lower, by seeing and hearing
immensely more, and in a thoughtful manner—and
it is precisely this that distinguishes man from
the animal, and the higher animal from the
lower. The world always becomes fuller for himwho grows up into the full stature of humanity;
there are always more interesting fishing-hooks,
thrown out to him; the number of his stimuli is
continually on the increase, and similarly the
varieties of his pleasure and pain,—the higher man
becomes always at the same time happier and
unhappier. Anillusion, however, is his constant
accompaniment all along: he thinks he is placed
as aspectatorandauditorbefore the great
pantomime and concert of life; he calls his nature
acontemplative nature, and thereby overlooks the
fact that he himself is also a real creator, and
continuous poet of life,—that he no doubt differs
greatly from theactorin this drama, the so-called
practical man, but differs still more from a mere
onlooker or spectatorbeforethe stage. There is
certainlyvis contemplativa, and re-examination of
his work peculiar to him as poet, but at the same
time, and first and foremost, he has thevis creativa,
which the practical man or doerlacks, whatever
appearance and current belief may say to the
contrary. It is we, we who think and feel,
that actually and unceasinglymakesomething
which does not yet exist: the whole eternally
increasing world of valuations, colours, weights,
perspectives, gradations, affirmations and negations.
This composition of ours is continually learnt,
practised, and translated into flesh and actuality,
and even into the commonplace, by the so-called
practical men (our actors, as we have said). Whatever
hasvaluein the present world, has it not in
itself, by its nature,—nature is always worthless:—but
a value was once given to it, bestowed upon it,and it waswewho gave and bestowed! We only
have created the worldwhich is of any account
to man!—But it is precisely this knowledge that
we lack, and when we get hold of it for a moment
we have forgotten it the next: we misunderstand
our highest power, we contemplative men, and
estimate ourselves at too low a rate,—we are
neither asproud nor as happyas we might be.302.The Danger of the Happiest Ones.—To have fine
senses and a fine taste; to be accustomed to the
select and the intellectually best as our proper and
readiest fare; to be blessed with a strong, bold,
and daring soul; to go through life with a quiet
eye and a firm step, ever ready for the worst as for
a festival, and full of longing for undiscovered
worlds and seas, men and Gods; to listen to all
joyous music, as if there, perhaps, brave men,
soldiers and seafarers, took a brief repose and
enjoyment, and in the profoundest pleasure of the
moment were overcome with tears and the whole
purple melancholy of happiness: who would not
like all this to behispossession, his condition! It
was thehappiness of Homer! The condition of
him who invented the Gods for the Greeks,—nay,
who inventedhisGods for himself! But let us not
conceal the fact that with this happiness of Homer
in one's soul, one is more liable to suffering than
any other creature under the sun! And only at
this price do we purchase the most precious pearl
that the waves of existence have hitherto washed
ashore! As its possessor one always becomes moresensitive to pain, and at last too sensitive: a
little displeasure and loathing sufficed in the end
to make Homer disgusted with life. He was
unable to solve a foolish little riddle which some
young fishers proposed to him! Yes, the little
riddles are the dangers of the happiest ones!—303.Two Happy Ones.—Certainly this man, notwithstanding
his youth, understands theimprovisation
of life, and astonishes even the acutest observers.
For it seems that he never makes a mistake,
although he constantly plays the most hazardous
games. One is reminded of the improvising masters
of the musical art, to whom even the listeners
would fain ascribe a divineinfallibilityof the
hand, notwithstanding that they now and then
make a mistake, as every mortal is liable to do.
But they are skilled and inventive, and always
ready in a moment to arrange into the structure
of the score the most accidental tone (where the
jerk of a finger or a humour brings it about), and
to animate the accident with a fine meaning and
a soul.—Here is quite a different man: everything
that he intends and plans fails with him in the long
run. That on which he has now and again set his
heart has already brought him several times to the
abyss, and to the very verge of ruin; and if he has
as yet got out of the scrape, it certainly has not
been merely with a "black eye." Do you think
he is unhappy over it? He resolved long ago
not to regard his own wishes and plans as of so
much importance. "If this does not succeed withme,"—he says to himself, "perhaps that will succeed;
and on the whole I do not know but that I am
under more obligation to thank my failures than
any of my successes. Am I made to be headstrong,
and to wear the bull's horns? That which constitutes
the worth and the sum of lifefor me, lies
somewhere else; I know more of life, because I
have been so often on the point of losing it; and
just on that account Ihavemore of life than any
of you!"304.In Doing we Leave Undone.—In the main all
those moral systems are distasteful to me which say:
"Do not do this! Renounce! Overcome thyself!"
On the other hand I am favourable to those moral
systems which stimulate me to do something, and
to do it again from morning till evening, and dream
of it at night, and think of nothing else but to do
itwell, as well as it is possible formealone!
From him who so lives there fall off one after the
other the things that do not pertain to such a life:
without hatred or antipathy, he seesthistake leave
of him to-day, andthatto-morrow, like the yellow
leaves which every livelier breeze strips from the
tree: or he does not see at all that they take leave
of him, so firmly is his eye fixed upon his goal,
and generally forward, not sideways, backward,
nor downward. "Our doing must determine what
we leave undone; in that we do, we leave undone"—so
it pleases me, so runsmy placitum. But I
do not mean to strive with open eyes for my
impoverishment; I do not like any of the negativevirtues whose very essence is negation and self-renunciation.305.Self-control.—Those moral teachers who first
and foremost order man to get himself into his
own power, induce thereby a curious infirmity in
him,—namely, a constant sensitiveness with reference
to all natural strivings and inclinations, and
as it were, a sort of itching. Whatever may henceforth
drive him, draw him, allure or impel him,
whether internally or externally—it always seems
to this sensitive being, as if his self-control were
in danger: he is no longer at liberty to trust
himself to any instinct, to any free flight, but
stands constantly with defensive mien, armed
against himself, with sharp distrustful eye, the
eternal watcher of his stronghold, to which office
he has appointed himself. Yes, he can begreatin
that position! But how unendurable he has now
become to others, how difficult even for himself
to bear, how impoverished and cut off from the
finest accidents of his soul! Yea, even from all
furtherinstruction! For we must be able to lose
ourselves at times, if we want to learn something
of what we have not in ourselves.306.Stoic and Epicurean.—The Epicurean selects the
situations, the persons, and even the events which
suit his extremely sensitive, intellectual constitution;
he renounces the rest—that is to say, by far
the greater part of experience—because it would betoo strong and too heavy fare for him. The Stoic,
on the contrary, accustoms himself to swallow
stones and vermin, glass-splinters and scorpions,
without feeling any disgust: his stomach is meant
to become indifferent in the end to all that the
accidents of existence cast into it:—he reminds
one of the Arabic sect of the Assaua, with which
the French became acquainted in Algiers; and
like those insensible persons, he also likes well
to have an invited public at the exhibition of his
insensibility, the very thing the Epicurean willingly
dispenses with:—he has of course his "garden"!
Stoicism may be quite advisable for men with
whom fate improvises, for those who live in violent
times and are dependent on abrupt and changeable
individuals. He, however, whoanticipatesthat fate will permit him to spin "a long thread,"
does well to make his arrangements in Epicurean
fashion; all men devoted to intellectual labour
have done it hitherto! For it would be a supreme
loss to them to forfeit their fine sensibility, and
acquire the hard, stoical hide with hedgehog
prickles in exchange.307.In Favour of Criticism.—Something now appears
to thee as an error which thou formerly lovedst as
a truth, or as a probability: thou pushest it from
thee and imaginest that thy reason has there
gained a victory. But perhaps that error was
then, when thou wast still another person—thou
art always another person,—just as necessary to
thee as all thy present "truths," like a skin, as itwere, which concealed and veiled from thee much
which thou still mayst not see. Thy new life, and
not thy reason, has slain that opinion for thee:thou dost not require it any longer, and now it
breaks down of its own accord, and the irrationality
crawls out of it as a worm into the
light. When we make use of criticism it is not
something arbitrary and impersonal,—it is, at least
very often, a proof that there are lively, active
forces in us, which cast a skin. We deny, and
must deny, because something in uswantsto live
and affirm itself, something which we perhaps do
not as yet know, do not as yet see!—So much in
favour of criticism.308.The History of each Day.—What is it that constitutes
the history of each day for thee? Look
at thy habits of which it consists: are they the
product of numberless little acts of cowardice and
laziness, or of thy bravery and inventive reason?
Although the two cases are so different, it is
possible that men might bestow the same praise
upon thee, and that thou mightst also be equally
useful to them in the one case as in the other.
But praise and utility and respectability may
suffice for him whose only desire is to have a good
conscience,—not however for thee, the "trier of the
reins," who hast aconsciousness of the conscience!309.Out of the Seventh Solitude.—One day the
wanderer shut a door behind him, stood still, andwept. Then he said: "Oh, this inclination and
impulse towards the true, the real, the non-apparent,
the certain! How I detest it! Why
does this gloomy and passionate taskmaster follow
justme? I should like to rest, but it does not
permit me to do so. Are there not a host of things
seducing me to tarry! Everywhere there are
gardens of Armida for me, and therefore there will
always be fresh separations and fresh bitterness
of heart! I must set my foot forward, my weary
wounded foot: and because I feel I must do this, I
often cast grim glances back at the most beautiful
things which could not detain me—becausethey
could not detain me!"310.Will and Wave.—How eagerly this wave comes
hither, as if it were a question of its reaching something!
How it creeps with frightful haste into the
innermost corners of the rocky cliff! It seems that it
wants to forestall some one; it seems that something
is concealed there that has value, high value.—And
now it retreats somewhat more slowly, still
quite white with excitement,—is it disappointed?
Has it found what it sought? Does it merely
pretend to be disappointed?—But already another
wave approaches, still more eager and wild than
the first, and its soul also seems to be full of secrets
and of longing for treasure-seeking. Thus live
the waves,—thus live we who exercise will!—I do
not say more.—But what! Ye distrust me? Ye are
angry at me, ye beautiful monsters? Do ye fear
that I will quite betray your secret? Well! Justbe angry with me, raise your green, dangerous
bodies as high as ye can, make a wall between me
and the sun—as at present! Verily, there is now
nothing more left of the world save green twilight
and green lightning-flashes. Do as ye will, ye
wanton creatures, roar with delight and wickedness—or
dive under again, pour your emeralds down
into the depths, and cast your endless white tresses
of foam and spray over them—it is all the same to
me, for all is so well with you, and I am so pleased
with you for it all: how could I betrayyou! For—take
this to heart!—I know you and your secret,
I know your race! You and I are indeed of one
race! You and I have indeed one secret!311.Broken Lights.—We are not always brave, and
when we are weary, people of our stamp are
liable to lament occasionally in this wise:—"It is
so hard to cause pain to men—oh, that it should
be necessary! What good is it to live concealed,
when we do not want to keep to ourselves
that which causes vexation? Would it not be
more advisable to live in the madding crowd, and
compensate individuals for sins that are committed
and must be committed against mankind in general?
Foolish with fools, vain with the vain, enthusiastic
with enthusiasts? Would that not be reasonable
when there is such an inordinate amount of
divergence in the main? When I hear of the
malignity of others against me—is not my first
feeling that of satisfaction? It is well that it
should be so!—I seem to myself to say to them—Iam so little in harmony with you, and have so
much truth on my side: see henceforth that ye be
merry at my expense as often as ye can! Here
are my defects and mistakes, here are my
illusions, my bad taste, my confusion, my tears,
my vanity, my owlish concealment, my contradictions!
Here you have something to laugh at!
Laugh then, and enjoy yourselves! I am not
averse to the law and nature of things, which is
that defects and errors should give pleasure!—To
be sure there were once 'more glorious' times,
when as soon as any one got an idea, however
moderately new it might be, he would think himself
soindispensableas to go out into the street
with it, and call to everybody: 'Behold! the
kingdom of heaven is at hand!'—I should not
miss myself, if I were a-wanting. We are none of
us indispensable!"—As we have said, however, we
do not think thus when we are brave; we do not
thinkabout itat all.312.My Dog.—I have given a name to my suffering,
and call it "dog,"—it is just as faithful, just as
importunate and shameless, just as entertaining,
just as wise, as any other dog—and I can domineer
over it, and vent my bad humour on it, as others
do with their dogs, servants, and wives.313.No Picture of a Martyr.—I will take my cue
from Raphael, and not paint any more martyrpictures. There are enough of sublime things
without its being necessary to seek sublimity where
it is linked with cruelty; moreover my ambition
would not be gratified in the least if I aspired to
be a sublime executioner.314.New Domestic Animals.—I want to have my
lion and my eagle about me, that I may always
have hints and premonitions concerning the amount
of my strength or weakness. Must I look down on
them to-day, and be afraid of them? And will
the hour come once more when they will look up
to me, and tremble?—315.The Last Hour.—Storms are my danger. Shall
I have my storm in which I shall perish, just as
Oliver Cromwell perished in his storm? Or shall
I go out as a light does, not first blown out by
the wind, but grown tired and weary of itself—a
burnt-out light? Or finally, shall I blow myself
out, so asnot to burn out!316.Prophetic Men.—Ye cannot divine how sorely
prophetic men suffer: ye think only that a fine
"gift" has been given to them, and would fain have it
yourselves,—but I will express my meaning by a
simile. How much may not the animals suffer from
the electricity of the atmosphere and the clouds!
Some of them, as we see, have a prophetic faculty
with regard to the weather, for example, apes(as one can observe very well even in Europe,—and
not only in menageries, but at Gibraltar). But
it never occurs to us that it is theirsufferings—that
are their prophets! When strong positive electricity,
under the influence of an approaching
cloud not at all visible, is suddenly converted
into negative electricity, and an alteration of the
weather is imminent, these animals then behave
as if an enemy were approaching them, and prepare
for defence, or flight: they generally hide
themselves,—they do not think of the bad weather
as weather, but as an enemy whose hand they
alreadyfeel!317.Retrospect.—We seldom become conscious of the
real pathos of any period of life as such, as long
as we continue in it, but always think it is
the only possible and reasonable thing for us
henceforth, and that it is altogetherethosand notpathos[10]—to speak and distinguish like the Greeks.
A few notes of music to-day recalled a winter and
a house, and a life of utter solitude to my mind,
and at the same time the sentiments in which I
then lived: I thought I should be able to live
in such a state always. But now I understand
that it was entirely pathos and passion, something
comparable to this painfully bold and truly comforting
music,—it is not one's lot to have thesesensations for years, still less for eternities: otherwise
one would become too "ethereal" for this
planet.318.Wisdom in Pain.—In pain there is as much
wisdom as in pleasure: like the latter it is one of
the best self-preservatives of a species. Were it not
so, pain would long ago have been done away with;
that it is hurtful is no argument against it, for
to be hurtful is its very essence. In pain I hear
the commanding call of the ship's captain: "Take
in sail!" "Man," the bold seafarer, must have
learned to set his sails in a thousand different ways,
otherwise he could not have sailed long, for the
ocean would soon have swallowed him up. We
must also know how to live with reduced energy:
as soon as pain gives its precautionary signal, it is
time to reduce the speed—some great danger,
some storm, is approaching, and we do well to
"catch" as little wind as possible.—It is true that
there are men who, on the approach of severe pain,
hear the very opposite call of command, and never
appear more proud, more martial, or more happy,
than when the storm is brewing; indeed, pain
itself provides them with their supreme moments!
These are the heroic men, the greatpain-bringersof mankind: those few and rare ones who need
just the same apology as pain generally,—and
verily, it should not be denied them! They are
forces of the greatest importance for preserving and
advancing the species, were it only because they are
opposed to smug ease, and do not conceal their
disgust at this kind of happiness.