319.As Interpreters of our Experiences.—One form of
honesty has always been lacking among founders
of religions and their kin:—they have never made
their experiences a matter of the intellectual conscience.
"What did I really experience? What
then took place in me and around me? Was my
understanding clear enough? Was my will
directly opposed to all deception of the senses,
and courageous in its defence against fantastic
notions?"—None of them ever asked
these questions, nor to this day do any of the
good religious people ask them. They have rather
a thirst for things which arecontrary to reason,
and they don't want to have too much difficulty
in satisfying this thirst,—so they experience
"miracles" and "regenerations," and hear the
voices of angels! But we who are different, who
are thirsty for reason, want to look as carefully into
our experiences, as in the case of a scientific experiment,
hour by hour, day by day! We ourselves
want to be our own experiments, and our
own subjects of experiment.320.On Meeting Again.—A: Do I quite understand
you? You are in search of something?Where,
in the midst of the present, actual world, isyourniche and star? Where canyoulay yourself in
the sun, so that you also may have a surplus of
well-being, that your existence may justify itself?
Let everyone do that for himself—you seem to say,
—and let him put talk about generalities, concern
about others and society, out of his mind!—B: I
want more; I am no seeker. I want to create my
own sun for myself.321.A New Precaution.—Let us no longer think so
much about punishing, blaming, and improving!
We shall seldom be able to alter an individual, and
if we should succeed in doing so, something else
may also succeed, perhaps unawares:wemay have
been altered by him! Let us rather see to it that
our own influence onall that is to comeoutweighs
and overweighs his influence! Let us not struggle
in direct conflict!—all blaming, punishing, and
desire to improve comes under this category.
But let us elevate ourselves all the higher! Let
us ever give to our pattern more shining colours!
Let us obscure the other by our light! No! We
do not mean to becomedarkerourselves on his
account, like all that punish and are discontented!
Let us rather go aside! Let us look away!322.A Simile.—Those thinkers in whom all the stars
move in cyclic orbits, are not the most profound.
He who looks into himself, as into an immense
universe, and carries Milky Ways in himself, knows
also how irregular all Milky Ways are; they lead
into the very chaos and labyrinth of existence.323.Happiness in Destiny.—Destiny confers its greatest
distinction upon us when it has made us fightfor a time on the side of our adversaries. We are
therebypredestinedto a great victory.324.In Media Vita.—No! Life has not deceived
me! On the contrary, from year to year I find it
richer, more desirable and more mysterious—from
the day on which the great liberator broke my
fetters, the thought that life may be an experiment
of the thinker—and not a duty, not a fatality, not
a deceit!—And knowledge itself may be for others
something different; for example, a bed of ease,
or the path to a bed of ease, or an entertainment,
or a course of idling,—for me it is a world of
dangers and victories, in which even the heroic
sentiments have their arena and dancing-floor.
"Life as a means to knowledge"—with this principle
in one's heart, one can not only be brave,
but can evenlive joyfully and laugh joyfully! And
who could know how to laugh well and live well,
who did not first understand the full meaning of
war and victory!325.What Belongs to Greatness.—Who can attain to
anything great if he does not feel the force and
will in himselfto inflictgreat pain? The ability
to suffer is a small matter: in that line, weak
women and even slaves often attain masterliness.
But not to perish from internal distress and doubt
when one inflicts great anguish and hears the cry
of this anguish—that is great, that belongs to
greatness.326.Physicians of the Soul and Pain.—All preachers
of morality, as also all theologians, have a bad
habit in common: all of them try to persuade
man that he is very ill, and that a severe, final,
radical cure is necessary. And because mankind as
a whole has for centuries listened too eagerly to
those teachers, something of the superstition that
the human race is in a very bad way has actually
come over men: so that they are now far too ready
to sigh; they find nothing more in life and make
melancholy faces at each other, as if life were
indeed very hardto endure. In truth, they are
inordinately assured of their life and in love with
it, and full of untold intrigues and subtleties for
suppressing everything disagreeable and for extracting
the thorn from pain and misfortune. It
seems to me that people always speakwith exaggerationabout pain and misfortune, as if it were
a matter of good behaviour to exaggerate here:
on the other hand people are intentionally silent
in regard to the number of expedients for alleviating
pain; as for instance, the deadening of it, or
feverish flurry of thought, or a peaceful position,
or good and bad reminiscences, intentions, hopes,—also
many kinds of pride and fellow-feeling which
have almost the effect of anæsthetics: while in the
greatest degree of pain fainting takes place of itself.
We understand very well how to pour sweetness
on our bitterness, especially on the bitterness of
our soul; we find a remedy in our bravery and
sublimity, as well as in the nobler delirium of submissionand resignation. A loss scarcely remains
a loss for an hour: in some way or other a gift from
heaven has always fallen into our lap at the same
moment—a new form of strength, for example:
be it but a new opportunity for the exercise of
strength! What have the preachers of morality
not dreamt concerning the inner "misery" of evil
men! Whatlieshave they not told us about the
misfortunes of impassioned men! Yes, lying is here
the right word: they were only too well aware of
the overflowing happiness of this kind of man, but
they kept silent as death about it; because it was
a refutation of their theory, according to which
happiness only originates through the annihilation
of the passions and the silencing of the will! And
finally, as regards the recipe of all those physicians
of the soul and their recommendation of a severe
radical cure, we may be allowed to ask: Is our
life really painful and burdensome enough for us
to exchange it with advantage for a Stoical mode
of life, and Stoical petrification? We donotfeelsufficiently miserableto have to feel ill in the
Stoical fashion!327.Taking Things Seriously.—The intellect is with
most people an awkward, obscure and creaking
machine, which is difficult to set in motion: they
call it "taking a thing seriously" when they work
with this machine, and want to think well—oh,
how burdensome must good thinking be to them!
That delightful animal, man, seems to lose his good-humour
whenever he thinks well; he becomes
"serious"! And "where there is laughing andgaiety, thinking cannot be worth anything:"—so
speaks the prejudice of this serious animal against
all "Joyful Wisdom."—Well, then! Let us show
that it is prejudice!328.Doing Harm to Stupidity.—It is certain that the
belief in the reprehensibility of egoism, preached
with such stubbornness and conviction, has on the
whole done harm to egoism (in favour of the herd-instinct,
as I shall repeat a hundred times!), especially
by depriving it of a good conscience, and bidding
us seek in it the true source of all misfortune.
"Thy selfishness is the bane of thy life"—so rang
the preaching for millenniums: it did harm, as we
have said, to selfishness, and deprived it of much
spirit, much cheerfulness, much ingenuity, and
much beauty; it stultified and deformed and
poisoned selfishness!—Philosophical antiquity, on
the other hand, taught that there was another
principal source of evil: from Socrates downwards,
the thinkers were never weary of preaching that
"your thoughtlessness and stupidity, your unthinking
way of living according to rule, and
your subjection to the opinion of your neighbour,
are the reasons why you so seldom attain to
happiness,—we thinkers are, as thinkers, the
happiest of mortals." Let us not decide here
whether this preaching against stupidity was more
sound than the preaching against selfishness; it
is certain, however, that stupidity was thereby
deprived of its good conscience:—these philosophersdid harm to stupidity.329.Leisure and Idleness.—There is an Indian
savagery, a savagery peculiar to the Indian blood,
in the manner in which the Americans strive after
gold: and the breathless hurry of their work—the
characteristic vice of the new world—already
begins to infect old Europe, and makes it savage
also, spreading over it a strange lack of intellectuality.
One is now ashamed of repose: even
long reflection almost causes remorse of conscience.
Thinking is done with a stop-watch, as dining
is done with the eyes fixed on the financial
newspaper; we live like men who are continually
"afraid of letting opportunities slip." "Better do
anything whatever, than nothing"—this principle
also is a noose with which all culture and all
higher taste may be strangled. And just as all
form obviously disappears in this hurry of workers,
so the sense for form itself, the ear and the eye for
the melody of movement, also disappear. The
proof of this is theclumsy perspicuitywhich is now
everywhere demanded in all positions where a
person would like to be sincere with his fellows,
in intercourse with friends, women, relatives,
children, teachers, pupils, leaders and princes,—one
has no longer either time or energy for ceremonies,
for roundabout courtesies, for anyespritin conversation,
or for anyotiumwhatever. For life in the
hunt for gain continually compels a person to
consume his intellect, even to exhaustion, in constant
dissimulation, overreaching, or forestalling:
the real virtue nowadays is to do something in ashorter time than another person. And so there
are only rare hours of sincere intercoursepermitted:
in them, however, people are tired, and would
not only like "to let themselves go," butto
stretch their legsout wide in awkward style.
The way people write theirlettersnowadays is
quite in keeping with the age; their style and
spirit will always be the true "sign of the times."
If there be still enjoyment in society and in art,
it is enjoyment such as over-worked slaves provide
for themselves. Oh, this moderation in "joy" of
our cultured and uncultured classes! Oh, this
increasing suspiciousness of all enjoyment!Workis winning over more and more the good conscience
to its side: the desire for enjoyment already calls
itself "need of recreation," and even begins to be
ashamed of itself. "One owes it to one's health,"
people say, when they are caught at a picnic. Indeed,
it might soon go so far that one could not yield to
the desire for thevita contemplativa(that is to say,
excursions with thoughts and friends), without self-contempt
and a bad conscience.—Well! Formerly
it was the very reverse: it was "action" that suffered
from a bad conscience. A man of good familyconcealedhis work when need compelled him to
labour. The slave laboured under the weight of
the feeling that he did something contemptible:—the
"doing" itself was something contemptible.
"Only inotiumandbellumis there nobility
and honour:" so rang the voice of ancient prejudice!330.Applause.—The thinker does not need applause
nor the clapping of hands, provided he be sure of
the clapping of his own hands: the latter, however,
he cannot do without. Are there men who could
also do without this, and in general without any
kind of applause? I doubt it: and even as regards
the wisest, Tacitus, who is no calumniator of the
wise, says:quando etiam sapientibus gloriæ cupido
novissima exuitur—that means with him: never.331.Better Deaf than Deafened.—Formerly a person
wanted to have acalling, but that no longer suffices
to-day, for the market has become too large,—there
has now to bebawling. The consequence
is that even good throats outcry each other, and
the best wares are offered for sale with hoarse voices;
without market-place bawling and hoarseness there
is now no longer any genius.—It is, sure enough,
an evil age for the thinker: he has to learn to find
his stillness betwixt two noises, and has to pretend
to be deaf until he finally becomes so. As long as
he has not learned this, he is in danger of perishing
from impatience and headaches.332.The Evil Hour.—There has perhaps been an
evil hour for every philosopher, in which he thought:
What do I matter, if people should not believe my
poor arguments!—And then some malicious bird
has flown past him and twittered: "What do you
matter? What do you matter?"333.What does Knowing Mean?—Non ridere, non
lugere, neque detestari, sed intelligere!says Spinoza,
so simply and sublimely, as is his wont. Nevertheless,
what else is thisintelligereultimately, but just
the form in which the three other things become
perceptible to us all at once? A result of the
diverging and opposite impulses of desiring to
deride, lament and execrate? Before knowledge
is possible each of these impulses must first have
brought forward its one-sided view of the object
or event. The struggle of these one-sided views
occurs afterwards, and out of it there occasionally
arises a compromise, a pacification, a recognition
of rights on all three sides, a sort of justice and
agreement: for in virtue of the justice and agreement
all those impulses can maintain themselves
in existence and retain their mutual rights. We, to
whose consciousness only the closing reconciliation
scenes and final settling of accounts of these long
processes manifest themselves, think on that account
thatintelligereis something conciliating, just and
good, something essentially antithetical to the
impulses; whereas it is onlya certain relation
of the impulses to one another. For a very
long time conscious thinking was regarded as
thinking proper: it is now only that the truth
dawns upon us that the greater part of our
intellectual activity goes on unconsciously and
unfelt by us; I believe, however, that the impulses
which are here in mutual conflict understand
right well how to make themselves felt byone another, and how to cause pain:—the violent,
sudden exhaustion which overtakes all thinkers,
may have its origin here (it is the exhaustion of
the battle-field). Aye, perhaps in our struggling
interior there is much concealedheroism, but
certainly nothing divine, or eternally-reposing-in-itself,
as Spinoza supposed.Consciousthinking, and
especially that of the philosopher, is the weakest,
and on that account also the relatively mildest
and quietest mode of thinking: and thus it is
precisely the philosopher who is most easily misled
concerning the nature of knowledge.334.One must Learn to Love.—This is our experience
in music: we must firstlearnin generalto hear,
to hear fully, and to distinguish a theme or a
melody, we have to isolate and limit it as a life by
itself; then we need to exercise effort and good-will
in orderto endureit in spite of its strangeness, we
need patience towards its aspect and expression,
and indulgence towards what is odd in it:—in the
end there comes a moment when we areaccustomedto it, when we expect it, when it dawns upon us
that we should miss it if it were lacking; and then
it goes on to exercise its spell and charm more
and more, and does not cease until we have become
its humble and enraptured lovers, who want it, and
want it again, and ask for nothing better from the
world.—It is thus with us, however, not only in
music: it is precisely thus that we havelearned to
loveall things that we now love. We are always
finally recompensed for our good-will, our patience,reasonableness and gentleness towards what is
unfamiliar, by the unfamiliar slowly throwing off
its veil and presenting itself to us as a new, ineffable
beauty:—that is itsthanksfor our hospitality. He
also who loves himself must have learned it in this
way: there is no other way. Love also has to be
learned.335.Cheers for Physics!—How many men are there
who know how to observe? And among the few
who do know,—how many observe themselves?
"Everyone is furthest from himself"—all the "triers
of the reins" know that to their discomfort; and
the saying, "Know thyself," in the mouth of a God
and spoken to man, is almost a mockery. But
that the case of self-observation is so desperate,
is attested best of all by the manner in whichalmost everybodytalks of the nature of a moral
action, that prompt, willing, convinced, loquacious
manner, with its look, its smile, and its pleasing
eagerness! Everyone seems inclined to say to
you: "Why, my dear Sir, that is preciselymyaffair!
You address yourself with your question to him
whois authorisedto answer, for I happen to be wiser
with regard to this matter than in anything else.
Therefore, when a man decides that 'this is right,'
when he accordingly concludes that 'it must therefore
be done,' and thereupondoeswhat he has thus
recognised as right and designated as necessary—then
the nature of his action ismoral!" But, my
friend, you are talking to me about three actions
instead of one: your deciding, for instance, that
"this is right," is also an action,—could one notjudge either morally or immorally?Whydo you
regard this, and just this, as right?—"Because my
conscience tells me so; conscience never speaks
immorally, indeed it determines in the first place
what shall be moral!"—But why do youlistento
the voice of your conscience? And in how far are
you justified in regarding such a judgment as true
and infallible? Thisbelief—is there no further
conscience for it? Do you know nothing of an
intellectual conscience? A conscience behind your
"conscience"? Your decision, "this is right," has
a previous history in your impulses, your likes and
dislikes, your experiences and non-experiences;
"howhas it originated?" you must ask, and afterwards
the further question: "whatreally impels me
to give ear to it?" You can listen to its command
like a brave soldier who hears the command of
his officer. Or like a woman who loves him who
commands. Or like a flatterer and coward, afraid
of the commander. Or like a blockhead who follows
because he has nothing to say to the contrary. In
short, you can give ear to your conscience in a
hundred different ways. Butthatyou hear this or
that judgment as the voice of conscience, consequently,thatyou feel a thing to be right—may
have its cause in the fact that you have never
reflected about yourself, and have blindly accepted
from your childhood what has been designated to
you asright: or in the fact that hitherto bread and
honours have fallen to your share with that which
you call your duty,—it is "right" to you, because
it seems to beyour"condition of existence" (that
you, however, have arightto existence appears toyou as irrefutable!). Thepersistencyof your moral
judgment might still be just a proof of personal
wretchedness or impersonality; your "moral force"
might have its source in your obstinacy—or in
your incapacity to perceive new ideals! And to
be brief: if you had thought more acutely, observed
more accurately, and had learned more, you would
no longer under all circumstances call this and that
your "duty" and your "conscience": the knowledgehow moral judgments have in general always
originated, would make you tired of these pathetic
words,—as you have already grown tired of other
pathetic words, for instance "sin," "salvation," and
"redemption."—And now, my friend, do not talk to
me about the categorical imperative! That word
tickles my ear, and I must laugh in spite of your
presence and your seriousness. In this connection
I recollect old Kant, who, as a punishment for havinggained possession surreptitiouslyof the "thing in
itself"—also a very ludicrous affair!—was imposed
upon by the categorical imperative, and with that in
his heartstrayed back againto "God," the "soul,"
"freedom," and "immortality," like a fox which
strays back into its cage: and it had beenhisstrength
and shrewdness which hadbroken openthis cage!—What?
You admire the categorical imperative in
you? This "persistency" of your so-called moral
judgment? This absoluteness of the feeling that
"as I think on this matter, so must everyone think"?
Admire rather yourselfishnesstherein! And the
blindness, paltriness, and modesty of your selfishness!
For it is selfishness in a person to regardhisjudgment as universal law, and a blind, paltryand modest selfishness besides, because it betrays
that you have not yet discovered yourself, that you
have not yet created for yourself any individual,
quite individual ideal:—for this could never be the
ideal of another, to say nothing of all, of every
one!——He who still thinks that "each would
have to act in this manner in this case," has not yet
advanced half a dozen paces in self-knowledge:
otherwise he would know that there neither are nor
can be similar actions,—that every action that has
been done, has been done in an entirely unique and
inimitable manner, and that it will be the same
with regard to all future actions; that all precepts
of conduct (and even the most esoteric and subtle
precepts of all moralities up to the present), apply
only to the coarse exterior,—that by means of them,
indeed, a semblance of equality can be attained,but only a semblance,—that in outlook or retrospect,everyaction is and remains an impenetrable affair,—that
our opinions of "good," "noble" and "great"
can never be demonstrated by our actions, because
no action is cognisable,—that our opinions, estimates,
and tables of values are certainly among
the most powerful levers in the mechanism of our
actions, that in every single case, nevertheless, the
law of their mechanism is untraceable. Let usconfineourselves, therefore, to the purification of our
opinions and appreciations, and to theconstruction
of new tables of value of our own:—we will, however,
brood no longer over the "moral worth of our
actions"! Yes, my friends! As regards the whole
moral twaddle of people about one another, it is
time to be disgusted with it! To sit in judgmentmorally ought to be opposed to our taste! Let
us leave this nonsense and this bad taste to those
who have nothing else to do, save to drag the past
a little distance further through time, and who are
never themselves the present,—consequently to the
many, to the majority! We, however,would seek
to become what we are,—the new, the unique, the incomparable,
making laws for ourselves and creating
ourselves! And for this purpose we must become
the best students and discoverers of all the laws
and necessities in the world. We must bephysicistsin order to becreatorsin that sense,—whereas
hitherto all appreciations and ideals have been
based onignoranceof physics, or incontradictionto
it. And therefore, three cheers for physics! And
still louder cheers for that whichimpelsus to it—our
honesty.336.Avarice of Nature.—Why has nature been so
niggardly towards humanity that she has not let
human beings shine, this man more and that man
less, according to their inner abundance of light?
Why have not great men such a fine visibility in
their rising and setting as the sun? How much
less equivocal would life among men then be!337.Future "Humanity."—When I look at this age
with the eye of a distant future, I find nothing
so remarkable in the man of the present day as his
peculiar virtue and sickness called "the historical
sense." It is a tendency to something quite newand foreign in history: if this embryo were given
several centuries and more, there might finally
evolve out of it a marvellous plant, with a smell
equally marvellous, on account of which our old
earth might be more pleasant to live in than it has
been hitherto. We moderns are just beginning
to form the chain of a very powerful, future sentiment,
link by link,—we hardly know what we are
doing. It almost seems to us as if it were not the
question of a new sentiment, but of the decline of all
old sentiments:—the historical sense is still something
so poor and cold, and many are attacked by it
as by a frost, and are made poorer and colder by it.
To others it appears as the indication of stealthily
approaching age, and our planet is regarded by
them as a melancholy invalid, who, in order to
forget his present condition, writes the history of
his youth. In fact, this is one aspect of the new
sentiment. He who knows how to regard the
history of man in its entirety ashis own history,
feels in the immense generalisation all the grief
of the invalid who thinks of health, of the old
man who thinks of the dream of his youth, of the
lover who is robbed of his beloved, of the martyr
whose ideal is destroyed, of the hero on the
evening of the indecisive battle which has
brought him wounds and the loss of a friend.
But to bear this immense sum of grief of all
kinds, to be able to bear it, and yet still be
the hero who at the commencement of a second
day of battle greets the dawn and his happiness,
as one who has an horizon of centuries before
and behind him, as the heir of all nobility, of allpast intellect, and the obligatory heir (as the
noblest) of all the old nobles; while at the same
time the first of a new nobility, the equal of which
has never been seen nor even dreamt of: to
take all this upon his soul, the oldest, the newest,
the losses, hopes, conquests, and victories of mankind:
to have all this at last in one soul, and to
comprise it in one feeling:—this would necessarily
furnish a happiness which man has not hitherto
known,—a God's happiness, full of power and love,
full of tears and laughter, a happiness which, like
the sun in the evening, continually gives of its
inexhaustible riches and empties into the sea,—and
like the sun, too, feels itself richest when even
the poorest fisherman rows with golden oars! This
divine feeling might then be called—humanity!338.The Will to Suffering and the Compassionate.—Is
it to your advantage to be above all compassionate?
And is it to the advantage of the sufferers when
you are so? But let us leave the first question for
a moment without an answer.—That from which
we suffer most profoundly and personally is almost
incomprehensible and inaccessible to every one else:
in this matter we are hidden from our neighbour
even when he eats at the same table with us.
Everywhere, however, where we arenoticedas
sufferers, our suffering is interpreted in a shallow
way; it belongs to the nature of the emotion of
pity todivestunfamiliar suffering of its properly
personal character:—our "benefactors" lower our
value and volition more than our enemies. Inmost benefits which are conferred on the unfortunate
there is something shocking in the intellectual
levity with which the compassionate person
plays the rôle of fate: he knows nothing of all the
inner consequences and complications which are
called misfortune formeor foryou! The entire
economy of my soul and its adjustment by "misfortune,"
the uprising of new sources and needs, the
closing up of old wounds, the repudiation of whole
periods of the past—none of these things which
may be connected with misfortune preoccupy the
dear sympathiser. He wishesto succour, and does
not reflect that there is a personal necessity for misfortune;
that terror, want, impoverishment, midnight
watches, adventures, hazards and mistakes are as
necessary to me and to you as their opposites, yea,
that, to speak mystically, the path to one's own
heaven always leads through the voluptuousness of
one's own hell. No, he knows nothing thereof. The
"religion of compassion" (or "the heart") bids him
help, and he thinks he has helped best when he has
helped most speedily! If you adherents of this
religion actually have the same sentiments towards
yourselves which you have towards your fellows,
if you are unwilling to endure your own suffering
even for an hour, and continually forestall all
possible misfortune, if you regard suffering and
pain generally as evil, as detestable, as deserving
of annihilation, and as blots on existence, well, you
have then, besides your religion of compassion, yet
another religion in your heart (and this is perhaps
the mother of the former)—the religion of smug ease.
Ah, how little you know of thehappinessofman, you comfortable and good-natured ones!—for
happiness and misfortune are brother and sister,
and twins, who grow tall together, or, as with
you,remain smalltogether! But now let us
return to the first question.—How is it at all
possible for a person to keep tohispath! Some
cry or other is continually calling one aside: our
eye then rarely lights on anything without it
becoming necessary for us to leave for a moment
our own affairs and rush to give assistance. I
know there are hundreds of respectable and laudable
methods of making me strayfrom my course,
and in truth the most "moral" of methods!
Indeed, the opinion of the present-day preachers
of the morality of compassion goes so far as to
imply that just this, and this alone is moral:—to
stray fromourcourse to that extent and to run
to the assistance of our neighbour. I am equally
certain that I need only give myself over to the
sight of one case of actual distress, and I, too,amlost! And if a suffering friend said to me,
"See, I shall soon die, only promise to die with
me"—I might promise it, just as—to select for
once bad examples for good reasons—the sight of
a small, mountain people struggling for freedom,
would bring me to the point of offering them my
hand and my life. Indeed, there is even a secret
seduction in all this awakening of compassion, and
calling for help: our "own way" is a thing too
hard and insistent, and too far removed from the
love and gratitude of others,—we escape from it
and from our most personal conscience, not at all
unwillingly, and, seeking security in the conscienceof others, we take refuge in the lovely temple of
the "religion of pity." As soon now as any war
breaks out, there always breaks out at the same
time a certain secret delight precisely in the
noblest class of the people: they rush with rapture
to meet the new danger ofdeath, because they
believe that in the sacrifice for their country they
have finally that long-sought-for permission—the
permissionto shirk their aim:—war is for them a
detour to suicide, a detour, however, with a good
conscience. And although silent here about some
things, I will not, however, be silent about my
morality, which says to me: Live in concealment
in order that thoumayestlive to thyself.
Liveignorantof that which seems to thy age
to be most important! Put at least the skin of
three centuries betwixt thyself and the present
day! And the clamour of the present day, the
noise of wars and revolutions, ought to be a
murmur to thee! Thou wilt also want to help,
but only those whose distress thou entirelyunderstandest,
because they haveonesorrow andonehope in common with thee—thyfriends: and only
intheway that thou helpest thyself:—I want to
make them more courageous, more enduring, more
simple, more joyful! I want to teach them that
which at present so few understand, and the
preachers of fellowship in sorrow least of all:—namely,fellowship in joy!339.Vita femina.—To see the ultimate beauties in a
work—all knowledge and good-will is not enough;it requires the rarest, good chance for the veil of
clouds to move for once from the summits, and for
the sun to shine on them. We must not only
stand at precisely the right place to see this, our
very soul itself must have pulled away the veil
from its heights, and must be in need of an external
expression and simile, so as to have a support and
remain master of itself. All these, however, are
so rarely united at the same time that I am
inclined to believe that the highest summit of all
that is good, be it work, deed, man, or nature, has
hitherto remained for most people, and even for
the best, as something concealed and shrouded:—that,
however, which unveils itself to us,unveils
itself to us but once. The Greeks indeed prayed:
"Twice and thrice, everything beautiful!" Ah,
they had their good reason to call on the Gods,
for ungodly actuality does not furnish us with
the beautiful at all, or only does so once! I mean
to say that the world is overfull of beautiful things,
but it is nevertheless poor, very poor, in beautiful
moments, and in the unveiling of those beautiful
things. But perhaps this is the greatest charm of
life: it puts a gold-embroidered veil of lovely
potentialities over itself, promising, resisting,
modest, mocking, sympathetic, seductive. Yes,
life is a woman!340.The Dying Socrates.—I admire the courage and
wisdom of Socrates in all that he did, said—and
did not say. This mocking and amorous demon
and rat-catcher of Athens, who made the most
insolent youths tremble and sob was not only thewisest babbler that has ever lived, but was just as
great in his silence. I would that he had also
been silent in the last moment of his life,—perhaps
he might then have belonged to a still higher
order of intellects. Whether it was death, or the
poison, or piety, or wickedness—something or
other loosened his tongue at that moment, and he
said: "O Crito, I owe a cock to Asclepios." For
him who has ears, this ludicrous and terrible "last
word" implies: "O Crito,life is a long sickness!"
Is it possible! A man like him, who had lived
cheerfully and to all appearance as a soldier,—was
a pessimist! He had merely put on a good
demeanour towards life, and had all along concealed
his ultimate judgment, his profoundest sentiment!
Socrates, Socrateshad suffered from life! And
he also took his revenge for it—with that veiled,
fearful, pious, and blasphemous phrase! Had even
a Socrates to revenge himself? Was there a grain
too little of magnanimity in his superabundant
virtue? Ah, my friends! We must surpass even
the Greeks!341.The Heaviest Burden.—What if a demon crept
after thee into thy loneliest loneliness some day
or night, and said to thee: "This life, as thou
livest it at present, and hast lived it, thou must
live it once more, and also innumerable times;
and there will be nothing new in it, but every
pain and every joy and every thought and every
sigh, and all the unspeakably small and great
in thy life must come to thee again, and all
in the same series and sequence—and similarlythis spider and this moonlight among the trees,
and similarly this moment, and I myself. The
eternal sand-glass of existence will ever be turned
once more, and thou with it, thou speck of dust!"—Wouldst
thou not throw thyself down and gnash
thy teeth, and curse the demon that so spake?
Or hast thou once experienced a tremendous
moment in which thou wouldst answer him: "Thou
art a God, and never did I hear aught more
divine!" If that thought acquired power over
thee, as thou art, it would transform thee, and
perhaps crush thee; the question with regard to all
and everything: "Dost thou want this once more,
and also for innumerable times?" would lie as the
heaviest burden upon thy activity! Or, how wouldst
thou have to become favourably inclined to thyself
and to life, so asto long for nothing more ardentlythan for this last eternal sanctioning and sealing?—342.Incipit Tragœdia.—When Zarathustra was thirty
years old, he left his home and the Lake of Urmi,
and went into the mountains. There he enjoyed
his spirit and his solitude, and for ten years did
not weary of it. But at last his heart changed,—and
rising one morning with the rosy dawn, he
went before the sun and spake thus unto it: "Thou
great star! What would be thy happiness if thou
hadst not those for whom thou shinest! For ten
years hast thou climbed hither unto my cave: thou
wouldst have wearied of thy light and of the
journey, had it not been for me, mine eagle, and my
serpent. But we awaited thee every morning, tookfrom thee thine overflow, and blessed thee for it.
Lo! I am weary of my wisdom, like the bee that
hath gathered too much honey; I need hands outstretched
to take it. I would fain bestow and
distribute, until the wise have once more become
joyous in their folly, and the poor happy in their
riches. Therefore must I descend into the deep,
as thou doest in the evening, when thou goest
behind the sea and givest light also to the nether-world,
thou most rich star! Like thee must Igo
down, as men say, to whom I shall descend. Bless
me then, thou tranquil eye, that canst behold even
the greatest happiness without envy! Bless the
cup that is about to overflow, that the water may
flow golden out of it, and carry everywhere the
reflection of thy bliss! Lo! This cup is again
going to empty itself, and Zarathustra is again
going to be a man."—Thus began Zarathustra's
down-going.