BOOK FIFTHWE FEARLESS ONES"Carcasse, tu trembles? Tutremblerais bien davantage, situ savais, où je te mène."—Turenne.343.What our Cheerfulness Signifies.—The most
important of more recent events—that "God is
dead," that the belief in the Christian God has
become unworthy of belief—already begins to cast
its first shadows over Europe. To the few at least
whose eye, whosesuspectingglance, is strong enough
and subtle enough for this drama, some sun
seems to have set, some old, profound confidence
seems to have changed into doubt: our old world
must seem to them daily more darksome, distrustful,
strange and "old." In the main, however, one may
say that the event itself is far too great, too remote,
too much beyond most people's power of apprehension,
for one to suppose that so much as the report
of it could havereachedthem; not to speak of many
who already knewwhathad really taken place, and
what must all collapse now that this belief had been
undermined,—because so much was built upon it,
so much rested on it, and had become one with it:
for example, our entire European morality. This
lengthy, vast and uninterrupted process of crumbling,
destruction, ruin and overthrow which is now
imminent: who has realised it sufficiently to-day to
have to stand up as the teacher and herald of such
a tremendous logic of terror, as the prophet of a
period of gloom and eclipse, the like of which hasprobably never taken place on earth before?...
Even we, the born riddle-readers, who wait as it
were on the mountains posted 'twixt to-day and
to-morrow, and engirt by their contradiction, we,
the firstlings and premature children of the coming
century, into whose sight especially the shadows
which must forthwith envelop Europeshouldalready have come—how is it that even we, without
genuine sympathy for this period of gloom,
contemplate its advent without anypersonalsolicitude or fear? Are we still, perhaps, too
much under theimmediate effectsof the event—and
are these effects, especially as regardsourselves,
perhaps the reverse of what was to be
expected—not at all sad and depressing, but
rather like a new and indescribable variety of
light, happiness, relief, enlivenment, encouragement,
and dawning day?... In fact, we philosophers
and "free spirits" feel ourselves irradiated
as by a new dawn by the report that the "old
God is dead"; our hearts overflow with gratitude,
astonishment, presentiment and expectation. At
last the horizon seems open once more, granting
even that it is not bright; our ships can at last
put out to sea in face of every danger; every
hazard is again permitted to the discerner; the
sea,oursea, again lies open before us; perhaps
never before did such an "open sea" exist.—344.To what Extent even We are still Pious.—It is
said with good reason that convictions have no civic
rights in the domain of science: it is only when aconviction voluntarily condescends to the modesty of
an hypothesis, a preliminary standpoint for experiment,
or a regulative fiction, that its access to the
realm of knowledge, and a certain value therein,
can be conceded,—always, however, with the restriction
that it must remain under police supervision,
under the police of our distrust.—Regarded
more accurately, however, does not this imply that
only when a convictionceasesto be a conviction
can it obtain admission into science? Does not
the discipline of the scientific spirit just commence
when one no longer harbours any conviction?...
It is probably so: only, it remains to be asked
whether,in order that this discipline may commence,
it is not necessary that there should already be a
conviction, and in fact one so imperative and
absolute, that it makes a sacrifice of all other
convictions. One sees that science also rests
on a belief: there is no science at all "without
premises." The question whethertruthis necessary,
must not merely be affirmed beforehand,
but must be affirmed to such an extent that
the principle, belief, or conviction finds expression,
that "there isnothing more necessarythan
truth, and in comparison with it everything else
has only a secondary value."—This absolute will
to truth: what is it? Is it the willnot to allow
ourselves to be deceived? Is it the willnot to deceive?
For the will to truth could also be interpreted
in this fashion, provided one includes under
the generalisation, "I will not deceive," the
special case, "I will not deceive myself." But
why not deceive? Why not allow oneself to bedeceived?—Let it be noted that the reasons for the
former eventuality belong to a category quite different
from those for the latter: one does not want to
be deceived oneself, under the supposition that it
is injurious, dangerous, or fatal to be deceived,—in
this sense science would be a prolonged
process of caution, foresight and utility; against
which, however, one might reasonably make objections.
What? is not-wishing-to-be-deceived really
less injurious, less dangerous, less fatal? What do
you know of the character of existence in all its
phases to be able to decide whether the greater
advantage is on the side of absolute distrust, or
of absolute trustfulness? In case, however, of both
being necessary, much trustingandmuch distrusting,
whence then should science derive the absolute
belief, the conviction on which it rests, that
truth is more important than anything else, even
than every other conviction? This conviction
could not have arisen if truthanduntruth had
both continually proved themselves to be useful:
as is the case. Thus—the belief in science,
which now undeniably exists, cannot have had
its origin in such a utilitarian calculation, but
ratherin spite ofthe fact of the inutility and
dangerousness of the "Will to truth," of "truth at
all costs," being continually demonstrated. "At
all costs": alas, we understand that sufficiently
well, after having sacrificed and slaughtered one
belief after another at this altar!—Consequently,
"Will to truth" doesnotimply, "I will not allow
myself to be deceived," but—there is no other
alternative—"I will not deceive, not even myself":and thus we have reached the realm of morality.
For, let one just ask oneself fairly: "Why wilt
thou not deceive?" especially if it should seem—and
it does seem—as if life were laid out with a
view to appearance, I mean, with a view to error,
deceit, dissimulation, delusion, self-delusion; and
when on the other hand it is a matter of fact that
the great type of life has always manifested itself
on the side of the most unscrupulous πολύτροποι.
Such an intention might perhaps, to express
it mildly, be a piece of Quixotism, a little
enthusiastic craziness; it might also, however, be
something worse, namely, a destructive principle,
hostile to life.... "Will to Truth,"—that might
be a concealed Will to Death.—Thus the question,
Why is there science? leads back to the moral
problem:What in general is the purpose of morality,
if life, nature, and history are "non-moral"?
There is no doubt that the conscientious man in
the daring and extreme sense in which he
is presupposed by the belief in science,affirms
thereby a world other thanthat of life, nature,
and history; and in so far as he affirms this "other
world," what? must he not just thereby—deny
its counterpart, this world,ourworld?... But
what I have in view will now be understood, namely,
that it is always ametaphysical beliefon which our
belief in science rests,—and that even we knowing
ones of to-day, the godless and anti-metaphysical,
still takeourfire from the conflagration kindled
by a belief a millennium old, the Christian belief,
which was also the belief of Plato, that God
is truth, that the truth is divine.... But what ifthis itself always becomes more untrustworthy,
what if nothing any longer proves itself divine,
except it be error, blindness, and falsehood;—what
if God himself turns out to be our most persistent
lie?—345.Morality as a Problem.—A defect in personality
revenges itself everywhere: an enfeebled, lank,
obliterated, self-disavowing and disowning personality
is no longer fit for anything good—it is
least of all fit for philosophy. "Selflessness"
has no value either in heaven or on earth; the great
problems all demandgreat love, and it is only the
strong, well-rounded, secure spirits, those who have
a solid basis, that are qualified for them. It makes
the most material difference whether a thinker stands
personally related to his problems, having his fate,
his need, and even his highest happiness therein;
or merely impersonally, that is to say, if he can
only feel and grasp them with the tentacles of cold,
prying thought. In the latter case I warrant that
nothing comes of it: for the great problems, granting
that they let themselves be grasped at all, do
not let themselves beheldby toads and weaklings:
that has ever been their taste—a taste also which
they share with all high-spirited women.—How is
it that I have not yet met with any one, not even in
books, who seems to have stood to morality in this
position, as one who knew morality as a problem,
and this problem ashis ownpersonal need, affliction,
pleasure and passion? It is obvious that
up to the present morality has not been a problem
at all; it has rather been the very ground onwhich people have met, after all distrust, dissension,
and contradiction, the hallowed place of
peace, where thinkers could obtain rest even from
themselves, could recover breath and revive. I
see no one who has ventured tocriticisethe
estimates of moral worth. I miss in this connection
even the attempts of scientific curiosity,
and the fastidious, groping imagination of psychologists
and historians, which easily anticipates a
problem and catches it on the wing, without rightly
knowing what it catches. With difficulty I have
discovered some scanty data for the purpose of
furnishing ahistory of the originof these feelings
and estimates of value (which is something different
from a criticism of them, and also something different
from a history of ethical systems). In an
individual case, I have done everything to encourage
the inclination and talent for this kind of history—in
vain, as it would seem to me at present. There
is little to be learned from those historians of
morality (especially Englishmen): they themselves
are usually, quite unsuspiciously, under the influence
of a definite morality, and act unwittingly
as its armour-bearers and followers—perhaps still
repeating sincerely the popular superstition of
Christian Europe, that the characteristic of moral
action consists in abnegation, self-denial, self-sacrifice,
or in fellow-feeling and fellow-suffering.
The usual error in their premises is their insistence
on a certainconsensusamong human beings,
at least among civilised human beings, with
regard to certain propositions of morality, and
from thence they conclude that these propositionsare absolutely binding even upon you and me; or
reversely, they come to the conclusion thatnomorality at all is binding, after the truth has
dawned upon them that to different peoples moral
valuations arenecessarilydifferent: both of which
conclusions are equally childish follies. The error
of the more subtle amongst them is that they
discover and criticise the probably foolish opinions
of a people about its own morality, or the opinions
of mankind about human morality generally; they
treat accordingly of its origin, its religious sanctions,
the superstition of free will, and such matters; and
they think that just by so doing they have criticised
the morality itself. But the worth of a precept,
"Thou shalt," is still fundamentally different from
and independent of such opinions about it, and
must be distinguished from the weeds of error
with which it has perhaps been overgrown: just
as the worth of a medicine to a sick person is
altogether independent of the question whether
he has a scientific opinion about medicine, or
merely thinks about it as an old wife would do.
A morality could even have grownout ofan
error: but with this knowledge the problem of its
worth would not even be touched.—Thus, no one
has hitherto tested thevalueof that most celebrated
of all medicines, called morality: for which
purpose it is first of all necessary for one—to call it
in question. Well, that is just our work.—346.Our Note of Interrogation.—But you don't understand
it? As a matter of fact, an effort will benecessary in order to understand us. We seek
for words; we seek perhaps also for ears. Who
are we after all? If we wanted simply to call ourselves
in older phraseology, atheists, unbelievers,
or even immoralists, we should still be far from
thinking ourselves designated thereby: we are all
three in too late a phase for people generally to
conceive, foryou, my inquisitive friends, to be able
to conceive, what is our state of mind under the
circumstances. No! we have no longer the bitterness
and passion of him who has broken loose,
who has to make for himself a belief, a goal,
and even a martyrdom out of his unbelief! We
have become saturated with the conviction (and
have grown cold and hard in it) that things
are not at all divinely ordered in this world, nor
even according to human standards do they go on
rationally, mercifully, or justly: we know the fact
that the world in which we live is ungodly, immoral,
and "inhuman,"—we have far too long interpreted
it to ourselves falsely and mendaciously, according
to the wish and will of our veneration, that is to say,
according to ourneed. For man is a venerating
animal! But he is also a distrustful animal: and
that the world isnotworth what we have believed
it to be worth is about the surest thing our distrust
has at last managed to grasp. So much
distrust, so much philosophy! We take good
care not to say that the world is oflessvalue:
it seems to us at present absolutely ridiculous
when man claims to devise valuesto surpassthe values of the actual world,—it is precisely
from that point that we have retraced our steps;as from an extravagant error of human conceit and
irrationality, which for a long period has not been
recognised as such. This error had its last expression
in modern Pessimism; an older and
stronger manifestation in the teaching of Buddha;
but Christianity also contains it, more dubiously,
to be sure, and more ambiguously, but none the
less seductive on that account. The whole attitude
of "manversusthe world," man as world-denying
principle, man as the standard of the value of
things, as judge of the world, who in the end
puts existence itself on his scales and finds it too
light—the monstrous impertinence of this attitude
has dawned upon us as such, and has disgusted
us,—we now laugh when we find, "ManandWorld" placed beside one another, separated by
the sublime presumption of the little word "and"!
But how is it? Have we not in our very laughing
just made a further step in despising mankind?
And consequently also in Pessimism, in despising
the existence cognisableby us? Have we not
just thereby become liable to a suspicion of an
opposition between the world in which we have
hitherto been at home with our venerations—for
the sake of which we perhapsendurelife—and
another worldwhich we ourselves are: an inexorable,
radical, most profound suspicion concerning
ourselves, which is continually getting us Europeans
more annoyingly into its power, and could
easily face the coming generation with the terrible
alternative: "Either do away with your
venerations, or—with yourselves!" The latter
would be Nihilism—but would not the formeralso be Nihilism? This isournote of interrogation.347.Believers and their Need of Belief.—How muchfaitha person requires in order to flourish, how
much "fixed opinion" he requires which he does
not wish to have shaken, because heholdshimself
thereby—is a measure of his power (or more plainly
speaking, of his weakness). Most people in old
Europe, as it seems to me, still need Christianity
at present, and on that account it still finds belief.
For such is man: a theological dogma might be
refuted to him a thousand times,—provided, however,
that he had need of it, he would again and
again accept it as "true,"—according to the famous
"proof of power" of which the Bible speaks.
Some have still need of metaphysics; but also
the impatientlonging for certaintywhich at present
discharges itself in scientific, positivist fashion
among large numbers of the people, the longing
by all means to get at something stable (while
on account of the warmth of the longing the
establishing of the certainty is more leisurely and
negligently undertaken): even this is still the
longing for a hold, a support; in short, theinstinct
of weakness, which, while not actually creating
religions, metaphysics, and convictions of all kinds,
nevertheless—preserves them. In fact, around all
these positivist systems there fume the vapours of
a certain pessimistic gloom, something of weariness,
fatalism, disillusionment, and fear of new
disillusionment—or else manifest animosity, ill-humour,
anarchic exasperation, and whatever thereis of symptom or masquerade of the feeling of
weakness. Even the readiness with which our
cleverest contemporaries get lost in wretched
corners and alleys, for example, in Vaterländerei
(so I designate Jingoism, calledchauvinismein
France, and "deutsch" in Germany), or in petty
æsthetic creeds in the manner of Parisiannaturalisme(which only brings into prominence and
uncoversthataspect of nature which excites
simultaneously disgust and astonishment—they
like at present to call this aspectla vérité vraie),
or in Nihilism in the St Petersburg style (that
is to say, in thebelief in unbelief, even to
martyrdom for it):—this shows always and above
all the need of belief, support, backbone, and
buttress.... Belief is always most desired, most
pressingly needed where there is a lack of will: for
the will, as emotion of command, is the distinguishing
characteristic of sovereignty and power.
That is to say, the less a person knows how to
command, the more urgent is his desire for one
who commands, who commands sternly,—a God, a
prince, a caste, a physician, a confessor, a dogma,
a party conscience. From whence perhaps it
could be inferred that the two world-religions,
Buddhism and Christianity, might well have had
the cause of their rise, and especially of their rapid
extension, in an extraordinarymalady of the will.
And in truth it has been so: both religions lighted
upon a longing, monstrously exaggerated by malady
of the will, for an imperative, a "Thou-shalt," a
longing going the length of despair; both religions
were teachers of fanaticism in times of slacknessof will-power, and thereby offered to innumerable
persons a support, a new possibility of exercising
will, an enjoyment in willing. For in fact fanaticism
is the sole "volitional strength" to which
the weak and irresolute can be excited, as a
sort of hypnotising of the entire sensory-intellectual
system, in favour of the over-abundant nutrition
(hypertrophy) of a particular point of view and a
particular sentiment, which then dominates—the
Christian calls it hisfaith. When a man arrives
at the fundamental conviction that herequiresto
be commanded, he becomes "a believer." Reversely,
one could imagine a delight and a power of self-determining,
and afreedomof will whereby a spirit
could bid farewell to every belief, to every wish for
certainty, accustomed as it would be to support
itself on slender cords and possibilities, and to
dance even on the verge of abysses. Such a spirit
would be thefree spirit par excellence.348.The Origin of the Learned.—The learned man in
Europe grows out of all the different ranks and
social conditions, like a plant requiring no specific
soil: on that account he belongs essentially and
involuntarily to the partisans of democratic thought.
But this origin betrays itself. If one has trained
one's glance to some extent to recognise in a
learned book or scientific treatise the intellectualidiosyncrasyof the learned man—all of them
have such idiosyncrasy,—and if we take it by
surprise, we shall almost always get a glimpse
behind it of the "antecedent history" of thelearned man and his family, especially of the
nature of their callings and occupations. Where
the feeling finds expression, "That is at last
proved, I am now done with it," it is commonly
the ancestor in the blood and instincts of the
learned man that approves of the "accomplished
work" in the nook from which he sees things;—the
belief in the proof is only an indication of what
has been looked upon for ages by a laborious
family as "good work." Take an example: the
sons of registrars and office-clerks of every kind,
whose main task has always been to arrange a
variety of material, distribute it in drawers, and
systematise it generally, evince, when they become
learned men, an inclination to regard a problem
as almost solved when they have systematised it.
There are philosophers who are at bottom nothing
but systematising brains—the formal part of the
paternal occupation has become its essence to
them. The talent for classifications, for tables
of categories, betrays something; it is not for
nothing that a person is the child of his parents.
The son of an advocate will also have to be an
advocate as investigator: he seeks as a first consideration,
to carry the point in his case, as a
second consideration, he perhaps seeks to be in
the right. One recognises the sons of Protestant
clergymen and schoolmasters by the naïve assurance
with which as learned men they already
assume their case to be proved, when it has but
been presented by them staunchly and warmly:
they are thoroughly accustomed to peoplebelievingin them,—it belonged to their fathers' "trade"!A Jew, contrariwise, in accordance with his
business surroundings and the past of his race,
is least of all accustomed—to people believing
him. Observe Jewish scholars with regard to this
matter,—they all lay great stress on logic, that
is to say, oncompellingassent by means of reasons;
they know that they must conquer thereby, even
when race and class antipathy is against them, even
where people are unwilling to believe them. For
in fact, nothing is more democratic than logic:
it knows no respect of persons, and takes even the
crooked nose as straight. (In passing we may
remark that in respect to logical thinking, in
respect tocleanerintellectual habits, Europe is
not a little indebted to the Jews; above all the
Germans, as being a lamentablydéraisonnablerace, who, even at the present day, must always
have their "heads washed"[11]in the first place.
Wherever the Jews have attained to influence, they
have taught to analyse more subtly, to argue more
acutely, to write more clearly and purely: it has
always been their problem to bring a people "toraison.")349.The Origin of the Learned once more.—To seek
self-preservation merely, is the expression of a state
of distress, or of limitation of the true, fundamental
instinct of life, which aims at theextension of power,
and with this in view often enough calls in question
self-preservation and sacrifices it. It should betaken as symptomatic when individual philosophers,
as for example, the consumptive Spinoza, have
seen and have been obliged to see the principal
feature of life precisely in the so-called self-preservative
instinct:—they have just been men
in states of distress. That our modern natural
sciences have entangled themselves so much with
Spinoza's dogma (finally and most grossly in
Darwinism, with its inconceivably one-sided doctrine
of the "struggle for existence"—), is probably
owing to the origin of most of the inquirers into
nature: they belong in this respect to the people,
their forefathers have been poor and humble persons,
who knew too well by immediate experience the
difficulty of making a living. Over the whole
of English Darwinism there hovers something of
the suffocating air of over-crowded England, something
of the odour of humble people in need and
in straits. But as an investigator of nature, a
person ought to emerge from his paltry human
nook: and in nature the state of distress does notprevail, but superfluity, even prodigality to the
extent of folly. The struggle for existence is only
anexception, a temporary restriction of the will to
live; the struggle, be it great or small, turns everywhere
on predominance, on increase and expansion,
on power, in conformity to the will to power, which
is just the will to live.350.In Honour of Homines Religiosi.—The struggle
against the church is most certainly (among other
things—for it has a manifold significance) thestruggle of the more ordinary, cheerful, confiding,
superficial natures against the rule of the graver,
profounder, more contemplative natures, that is to
say, the more malign and suspicious men, who
with long continued distrust in the worth of life,
brood also over their own worth:—the ordinary
instinct of the people, its sensual gaiety, its "good
heart," revolts against them. The entire Roman
Church rests on a Southern suspicion of the nature
of man (always misunderstood in the North), a
suspicion whereby the European South has succeeded
to the inheritance of the profound Orient—the
mysterious, venerable Asia—and its contemplative
spirit. Protestantism was a popular
insurrection in favour of the simple, the respectable,
the superficial (the North has always been
more good-natured and more shallow than the
South), but it was the French Revolution that first
gave the sceptre wholly and solemnly into the
hands of the "good man" (the sheep, the ass, the
goose, and everything incurably shallow, bawling,
and fit for the Bedlam of "modern ideas").351.In Honour of Priestly Natures.—I think that
philosophers have always felt themselves furthest
removed from that which the people (in all classes
of society nowadays) take for wisdom: the prudent,
bovine placidity, piety, and country-parson meekness,
which lies in the meadow andgazes atlife
seriously and ruminatingly:—this is probably because
philosophers have not had sufficiently the
taste of the "people," or of the country-parsonfor that kind of wisdom. Philosophers will also
perhaps be the latest to acknowledge that the
peopleshouldunderstand something of that which
lies furthest from them, something of the greatpassionof the thinker, who lives and must live
continually in the storm-cloud of the highest
problems and the heaviest responsibilities (consequently,
not gazing at all, to say nothing of
doing so indifferently, securely, objectively). The
people venerate an entirely different type of man
when on their part they form the ideal of a
"sage," and they are a thousand times justified
in rendering homage with the highest eulogies and
honours to precisely that type of men—namely,
the gentle, serious, simple, chaste, priestly natures
and those related to them,—it is to them that
the praise falls due in the popular veneration of
wisdom. And to whom should the people ever
have more reason to be grateful than to these men
who pertain to its class and rise from its ranks, but
are persons consecrated, chosen, andsacrificedfor its
good—they themselves believe themselves sacrificed
to God,—before whom the people can pour forth its
heart with impunity, by whom it canget ridof its
secrets, cares, and worse things (for the man who
"communicates himself" gets rid of himself, and he
who has "confessed" forgets). Here there exists a
great need: for sewers and pure cleansing waters
are required also for spiritual filth, and rapid
currents of love are needed, and strong, lowly, pure
hearts, who qualify and sacrifice themselves for
such service of the non-public health department—for
itisa sacrificing, the priest is, and continues tobe, a human sacrifice.... The people regard such
sacrificed, silent, serious men of "faith" as "wise,"
that is to say, as men who have become sages, as
"reliable" in relation to their own unreliability.
Who would desire to deprive the people of that
expression and that veneration?—But as is fair on
the other side, among philosophers the priest also
is still held to belong to the "people," and isnotregarded as a sage, because, above all, they themselves
do not believe in "sages," and they already
scent "the people" in this very belief and superstition.
It wasmodestywhich invented in Greece
the word "philosopher," and left to the play-actors
of the spirit the superb arrogance of assuming
the name "wise"—the modesty of such monsters
of pride and self-glorification as Pythagoras and
Plato.—352.Why we can hardly Dispense with Morality.—The
naked man is generally an ignominious
spectacle—I speak of us European males (and by
no means of European females!). If the most
joyous company at table suddenly found themselves
stripped and divested of their garments through the
trick of an enchanter, I believe that not only would
the joyousness be gone and the strongest appetite
lost;—it seems that we Europeans cannot at all
dispense with the masquerade that is called
clothing. But should not the disguise of "moral
men," the screening under moral formulæ and
notions of decency, the whole kindly concealment
of our conduct under conceptions of duty, virtue,
public sentiment, honourableness, and disinterestedness,have just as good reasons in support
of it? Not that I mean hereby that human
wickedness and baseness, in short, the evil wild
beast in us, should be disguised; on the contrary,
my idea is that it is precisely astame
animalsthat we are an ignominious spectacle and
require moral disguising,—that the "inner man"
in Europe is far from having enough of intrinsic
evil "to let himself be seen" with it (to bebeautifulwith it). The European disguises himselfin
moralitybecause he has become a sick, sickly,
crippled animal, who has good reasons for being
"tame," because he is almost an abortion, an imperfect,
weak and clumsy thing.... It is not the fierceness
of the beast of prey that finds moral disguise
necessary, but the gregarious animal, with its
profound mediocrity, anxiety and ennui.Morality
dresses up the European—let us acknowledge it!—in
more distinguished, more important, more conspicuous
guise—in "divine" guise—353.The Origin of Religions.—The real inventions of
founders of religions are, on the one hand, to
establish a definite mode of life and everyday
custom, which operates asdisciplina voluntatis, and
at the same time does away with ennui; and on
the other hand, to give to that very mode of life aninterpretation, by virtue of which it appears illumined
with the highest value; so that it henceforth becomes
a good for which people struggle, and under certain
circumstances lay down their lives. In truth, thesecond of these inventions is the more essential:
the first, the mode of life, has usually been there
already, side by side, however, with other modes of
life, and still unconscious of the value which it
embodies. The import, the originality of the
founder of a religion, discloses itself usually in the
fact that heseesthe mode of life,selectsit, anddivinesfor the first time the purpose for which it
can be used, how it can be interpreted. Jesus (or
Paul), for example, found around him the life of the
common people in the Roman province, a modest,
virtuous, oppressed life: he interpreted it, he put
the highest significance and value into it—and
thereby the courage to despise every other mode
of life, the calm fanaticism of the Moravians, the
secret, subterranean self-confidence which goes on
increasing, and is at last ready "to overcome the
world" (that is to say, Rome, and the upper classes
throughout the empire). Buddha, in like manner,
found the same type of man,—he found it in fact
dispersed among all the classes and social ranks of
a people who were good and kind (and above all
inoffensive), owing to indolence, and who likewise
owing to indolence, lived abstemiously, almost
without requirements. He understood that such a
type of man, with all itsvis inertiae, had inevitably
to glide into a belief which promisesto avoidthe
return of earthly ill (that is to say, labour and
activity generally),—this "understanding" was his
genius. The founder of a religion possesses
psychological infallibility in the knowledge of a
definite, average type of souls, who have not yetrecognisedthemselves as akin. It is he who bringsthem together: the founding of a religion, therefore,
always becomes a long ceremony of recognition.—354.The "Genius of the Species."—The problem of
consciousness (or more correctly: of becoming
conscious of oneself) meets us only when we begin
to perceive in what measure we could dispense with
it: and it is at the beginning of this perception
that we are now placed by physiology and zoology
(which have thus required two centuries to overtake
the hint thrown out in advance by Leibnitz).
For we could in fact think, feel, will, and recollect,
we could likewise "act" in every sense of the term,
and nevertheless nothing of it all would require
to "come into consciousness" (as one says metaphorically).
The whole of life would be possible
without its seeing itself as it were in a mirror: as
in fact even at present the far greater part of our
life still goes on without this mirroring,—and even
our thinking, feeling, volitional life as well, however
painful this statement may sound to an older
philosopher.Whatthen isthe purposeof consciousness
generally, when it is in the mainsuperfluous?—Now
it seems to me, if you will hear my answer
and its perhaps extravagant supposition, that the
subtlety and strength of consciousness are always in
proportion to thecapacity for communicationof a man
(or an animal), the capacity for communication in
its turn being in proportion to thenecessity for
communication: the latter not to be understood as if
precisely the individual himself who is master in
the art of communicating and making known hisnecessities would at the same time have to be
most dependent upon others for his necessities.
It seems to me, however, to be so in relation to
whole races and successions of generations: where
necessity and need have long compelled men to
communicate with their fellows and understand
one another rapidly and subtly, a surplus of the
power and art of communication is at last acquired,
as if it were a fortune which had gradually accumulated,
and now waited for an heir to squander it
prodigally (the so-called artists are these heirs, in
like manner the orators, preachers, and authors:
all of them men who come at the end of a long
succession, "late-born" always, in the best sense of
the word, and as has been said,squanderersby
their very nature). Granted that this observation
is correct, I may proceed further to the conjecture
thatconsciousness generally has only been developed
under the pressure of the necessity for communication,—that
from the first it has been necessary and
useful only between man and man (especially
between those commanding and those obeying),
and has only developed in proportion to its utility.
Consciousness is properly only a connecting network
between man and man,—it is only as
such that it has had to develop; the recluse
and wild-beast species of men would not have
needed it. The very fact that our actions,
thoughts, feelings and motions come within the
range of our consciousness—at least a part of them—is
the result of a terrible, prolonged "must"
ruling man's destiny: as the most endangered
animal heneededhelp and protection; he neededhis fellows, he was obliged to express his distress,
he had to know how to make himself understood—and
for all this he needed "consciousness" first of all,
consequently, to "know" himself what he lacked,
to "know" how he felt and to "know" what he
thought. For, to repeat it once more, man, like
every living creature, thinks unceasingly, but does
not know it; the thinking which is becomingconscious of itselfis only the smallest part thereof,
we may say, the most superficial part, the worst
part:—for this conscious thinking aloneis done in
words, that is to say, in the symbols for communication,
by means of which the origin of consciousness
is revealed. In short, the development of speech
and the development of consciousness (not of
reason, but of reason becoming self-conscious) go
hand in hand. Let it be further accepted that it
is not only speech that serves as a bridge between
man and man, but also the looks, the pressure and
the gestures; our becoming conscious of our sense
impressions, our power of being able to fix them,
and as it were to locate them outside of ourselves,
has increased in proportion as the necessity has
increased for communicating them toothersby
means of signs. The sign-inventing man is at the
same time the man who is always more acutely
self-conscious; it is only as a social animal that man
has learned to become conscious of himself,—he is
doing so still, and doing so more and more.—As is
obvious, my idea is that consciousness does not
properly belong to the individual existence of man,
but rather to the social and gregarious nature in
him; that, as follows therefrom, it is only in relationto communal and gregarious utility that it
is finely developed; and that consequently each
of us, in spite of the best intention ofunderstandinghimself as individually as possible, and of "knowing
himself," will always just call into consciousness
the non-individual in him, namely, his "averageness";—that
our thought itself is continuously as it
wereoutvotedby the character of consciousness—by
the imperious "genius of the species" therein—and
is translated back into the perspective of the
herd. Fundamentally our actions are in an incomparable
manner altogether personal, unique and
absolutely individual—there is no doubt about it;
but as soon as we translate them into consciousness,
theydo not appear so any longer.... This is
the proper phenomenalism and perspectivism as I
understand it: the nature ofanimal consciousnessinvolves the notion that the world of which we can
become conscious is only a superficial and symbolic
world, a generalised and vulgarised world;—that
everything which becomes consciousbecomesjust
thereby shallow, meagre, relatively stupid,—a
generalisation, a symbol, a characteristic of the
herd; that with the evolving of consciousness there
is always combined a great, radical perversion,
falsification, superficialisation, and generalisation.
Finally, the growing consciousness is a danger,
and whoever lives among the most conscious
Europeans knows even that it is a disease. As
may be conjectured, it is not the antithesis of
subject and object with which I am here concerned:
I leave that distinction to the epistemologists
who have remained entangled in thetoils of grammar (popular metaphysics). It is
still less the antithesis of "thing in itself" and
phenomenon, for we do not "know" enough to be
entitled evento make such a distinction. Indeed,
we have not any organ at all forknowingor for
"truth"; we "know" (or believe, or fancy) just as
much as may beof usein the interest of the human
herd, the species; and even what is here called
"usefulness" is ultimately only a belief, a fancy,
and perhaps precisely the most fatal stupidity by
which we shall one day be ruined.355.The Origin of our Conception of "Knowledge."—I
take this explanation from the street.  I heard one
of the people saying that "he knew me," so I
asked myself:  What do the people really understand
by knowledge?  What do they want when they seek
"knowledge"? Nothing more than
that what is strange is to be traced back to somethingknown. And we philosophers—have we
really understoodanything moreby knowledge?
The known, that is to say, what we are accustomed
to, so that we no longer marvel at it, the commonplace,
any kind of rule to which we are habituated,
all and everything in which we know ourselves to be
at home:—what? is our need of knowing not just
this need of the known? the will to discover in
everything strange, unusual, or questionable, something
which no longer disquiets us? Is it not
possible that it should be theinstinct of fearwhich
enjoins upon us to know? Is it not possible that
the rejoicing of the discerner should be just hisrejoicing in the regained feeling of security?...
One philosopher imagined the world "known"
when he had traced it back to the "idea": alas,
was it not because the idea was so known, so
familiar to him? because he had so much less fear
of the "idea"—Oh, this moderation of the discerners!
let us but look at their principles, and at
their solutions of the riddle of the world in this
connection! When they again find aught in things,
among things, or behind things, that is unfortunately
very well known to us, for example, our multiplication
table, or our logic, or our willing and desiring,
how happy they immediately are! For "what is
known is understood": they are unanimous as to
that. Even the most circumspect among them think
that the known is at leastmore easily understoodthan
the strange; that for example, it is methodically
ordered to proceed outward from the "inner world,"
from "the facts of consciousness," because it is the
world which isbetter known to us! Error of errors!
The known is the accustomed, and the accustomed
is the most difficult of all to "understand," that
is to say, to perceive as a problem, to perceive
as strange, distant, "outside of us."... The great
certainty of the natural sciences in comparison with
psychology and the criticism of the elements of
consciousness—unnaturalsciences as one might
almost be entitled to call them—rests precisely on
the fact that they takewhat is strangeas their
object: while it is almost like something contradictory
and absurdto wishto take generally what
is not strange as an object....356.In what Manner Europe will always become "more
Artistic."—Providing a living still enforces even
in the present day (in our transition period when
so much ceases to enforce) a definiterôleon almost
all male Europeans, their so-called callings; some
have the liberty, an apparent liberty, to choose
this rôle themselves, but most have it chosen for
them. The result is strange enough. Almost all
Europeans confound themselves with their rôle
when they advance in age; they themselves are the
victims of their "good acting," they have forgotten
how much chance, whim and arbitrariness swayed
them when their "calling" was decided—and how
many other rôles theycouldperhaps have played:
for it is now too late! Looked at more closely, we
see that their characters have actuallyevolvedout
of their rôle, nature out of art. There were ages in
which people believed with unshaken confidence,
yea, with piety, in their predestination for this very
business, for that very mode of livelihood, and
would not at all acknowledge chance, or the
fortuitous rôle, or arbitrariness therein. Ranks,
guilds, and hereditary trade privileges succeeded,
with the help of this belief, in rearing those extraordinary
broad towers of society which distinguished
the Middle Ages, and of which at all events one
thing remains to their credit: capacity for duration
(and duration is a value of the first rank on earth!).
But there are ages entirely the reverse, the properly
democratic ages, in which people tend to become
more and more oblivious of this conviction, and asort of impudent conviction and quite contrary mode
of viewing things comes to the front, the Athenian
conviction which is first observed in the epoch of
Pericles, the American conviction of the present
day, which wants also more and more to become
an European conviction, whereby the individual is
convinced that he can do almost anything, that hecan play almost any rôle, whereby everyone makes experiments
with himself, improvises, tries anew, tries
with delight, whereby all nature ceases and becomes
art.... The Greeks, having adopted thisrôle-creed—an
artist creed, if you will—underwent step
by step, as is well known, a curious transformation,
not in every respect worthy of imitation:they
became actual stage-players; and as such they
enchanted, they conquered all the world, and at last
even the conqueror of the world, (for theGraeculus
histrioconquered Rome, andnotGreek culture, as
the naïve are accustomed to say....) What I
fear, however, and what is at present obvious, if we
desire to perceive it, is that we modern men are
quite on the same road already; and whenever man
begins to discover in what respect he plays a rôle,
and to what extent hecanbe a stage-player, hebecomesa stage-player.... A new flora and fauna
of men thereupon springs up, which cannot grow in
more stable, more restricted eras—or is left "at the
bottom," under the ban and suspicion of infamy—,
thereupon the most interesting and insane periods
of history always make their appearance, in which
"stage-players,"allkinds of stage-players, are the
real masters. Precisely thereby another species
of man is always more and more injured, and inthe end made impossible: above all the great
"architects"; the building power is now being
paralysed; the courage that makes plans for the
distant future is disheartened; there begins to be
a lack of organising geniuses. Who is there who
would now venture to undertake works for the
completion of which millenniums would have to bereckonedupon? The fundamental belief is dying
out, on the basis of which one could calculate,
promise and anticipate the future in one's plan, and
offer it as a sacrifice thereto, that in fact man has only
value and significance in so far as he isa stone in a
great building; for which purpose he has first of all
to besolid, he has to be a "stone."... Above all,
not a—stage-player! In short—alas! this fact
will be hushed up for some considerable time to
come!—that which from henceforth will no longer
be built, andcanno longer be built, is—a society
in the old sense of the term; to build this structure
everything is lacking, above all, the material.None of us are any longer material for a society:
that is a truth which is seasonable at present!
It seems to me a matter of indifference that meanwhile
the most short-sighted, perhaps the most
honest, and at any rate the noisiest species of men
of the present day, our friends the Socialists, believe,
hope, dream, and above all scream and scribble
almost the opposite; in fact one already reads their
watchword of the future: "free society," on all
tables and walls. Free society? Indeed! Indeed!
But you know, gentlemen, sure enough whereof one
builds it? Out of wooden iron! Out of the famous
wooden iron! And not even out of wooden....