357.The old Problem: "What is German?"—Let us
count up apart the real acquisitions of philosophical
thought for which we have to thank German
intellects: are they in any allowable sense to be
counted also to the credit of the whole race? Can
we say that they are at the same time the work of
the "German soul," or at least a symptom of it, in
the sense in which we are accustomed to think, for
example, of Plato's ideomania, his almost religious
madness for form, as an event and an evidence of
the "Greek soul"? Or would the reverse perhaps
be true? Were they so individual, so much an
exception to the spirit of the race, as was, for
example, Goethe's Paganism with a good conscience?
Or as Bismarck's Macchiavelism was with
a good conscience, his so-called "practical politics"
in Germany? Did our philosophers perhaps even
go counter to theneedof the "German soul"? In
short, were the German philosophers really philosophicalGermans?—I call to mind three cases.
Firstly,Leibnitz'sincomparable insight—with which
he obtained the advantage not only over Descartes,
but over all who had philosophised up to his time,—that
consciousness is only an accident of mental
representation, andnotits necessary and essential
attribute; that consequently what we call consciousness
only constitutes a state of our spiritual and
psychical world (perhaps a morbid state), and isfar
from being that world itself:—is there anything
German in this thought, the profundity of which
has not as yet been exhausted? Is there reasonto think that a person of the Latin race would
not readily have stumbled on this reversal of the
apparent?—for it is a reversal. Let us call to mind
secondly, the immense note of interrogation whichKantwrote after the notion of causality. Not that
he at all doubted its legitimacy, like Hume: on
the contrary, he began cautiously to define the
domain within which this notion has significance
generally (we have not even yet got finished with
the marking out of these limits). Let us take
thirdly, the astonishing hit ofHegel, who stuck at
no logical usage or fastidiousness when he ventured
to teach that the conceptions of kinds developout
of one another: with which theory the thinkers in
Europe were prepared for the last great scientific
movement, for Darwinism—for without Hegel there
would have been no Darwin. Is there anything
German in this Hegelian innovation which first
introduced the decisive conception of evolution
into science? Yes, without doubt we feel that
there is something of ourselves "discovered" and
divined in all three cases; we are thankful for it,
and at the same time surprised; each of these
three principles is a thoughtful piece of German
self-confession, self-understanding, and self-knowledge.
We feel with Leibnitz that "our inner
world is far richer, ampler, and more concealed";
as Germans we are doubtful, like Kant, about the
ultimate validity of scientific knowledge of nature,
and in general about whatevercanbe knowncausaliter: theknowableas such now appears to us
oflessworth. We Germans should still have been
Hegelians, even though there had never been aHegel, inasmuch as we (in contradistinction to all
Latin peoples) instinctively attribute to becoming,
to evolution, a profounder significance and higher
value than to that which "is"—we hardly believe
at all in the validity of the concept "being."
This is all the more the case because we are not
inclined to concede to our human logic that it is
logic in itself, that it is the only kind of logic (we
should rather like, on the contrary, to convince
ourselves that it is only a special case, and perhaps
one of the strangest and most stupid). A fourth
question would be whether alsoSchopenhauerwith
his Pessimism, that is to say the problem ofthe worth of existence, had to be a German. I
think not. The eventafterwhich this problem
was to be expected with certainty, so that an
astronomer of the soul could have calculated the
day and the hour for it—namely, the decay of the
belief in the Christian God, the victory of scientific
atheism,—is a universal European event, in which
all races are to have their share of service and
honour. On the contrary, it has to be ascribed
precisely to the Germans—those with whom
Schopenhauer was contemporary,—that they delayed
this victory of atheism longest, and endangered
it most. Hegel especially was its retarderpar excellence, in virtue of the grandiose attempt
which he made to persuade us of the divinity of
existence, with the help at the very last of our
sixth sense, "the historical sense." As philosopher,
Schopenhauer was thefirstavowed and inflexible
atheist we Germans have had: his hostility to
Hegel had here its background. The non-divinityof existence was regarded by him as something
understood, palpable, indisputable; he always lost
his philosophical composure and got into a passion
when he saw anyone hesitate and beat about the
bush here. It is at this point that his thorough
uprightness of character comes in: unconditional,
honest atheism is precisely thepreliminary conditionfor his raising the problem, as a final and hardwon
victory of the European conscience, as the most
prolific act of two thousand years' discipline to
truth, which in the end no longer tolerates thelieof the belief in a God.... One sees what has
really gained the victory over the Christian God—,
Christian morality itself, the conception of veracity,
taken ever more strictly, the confessional subtlety
of the Christian conscience, translated and sublimated
to the scientific conscience, to intellectual
purity at any price. To look upon nature as if it
were a proof of the goodness and care of a God;
to interpret history in honour of a divine reason,
as a constant testimony to a moral order in the
world and a moral final purpose; to explain
personal experiences as pious men have long
enough explained them, as if everything were a
dispensation or intimation of Providence, something
planned and sent on behalf of the salvation
of the soul: all that is nowpast, it has conscienceagainstit, it is regarded by all the more acute
consciences as disreputable and dishonourable,
as mendaciousness, femininism, weakness, and
cowardice,—by virtue of this severity, if by anything,
we aregoodEuropeans, the heirs of Europe's
longest and bravest self-conquest. When we thusreject the Christian interpretation, and condemn
its "significance" as a forgery, we are immediately
confronted in a striking manner with theSchopenhauerianquestion:Has existence then a significance
at all?—the question which will require a couple of
centuries even to be completely heard in all its
profundity. Schopenhauer's own answer to this
question was—if I may be forgiven for saying so—a
premature, juvenile reply, a mere compromise,
a stoppage and sticking in the very same Christian-ascetic,
moral perspectives,the belief in which had
got notice to quitalong with the belief in God....
But heraisedthe question—as a good European,
as we have said, andnotas a German.—Or did the
Germans prove at least by the way in which they
seized on the Schopenhauerian question, their
inner connection and relationship to him, their
preparation for his problem, and theirneedof it?
That there has been thinking and printing even
in Germany since Schopenhauer's time on the
problem raised by him,—it was late enough!—does
not at all suffice to enable us to decide in
favour of this closer relationship; one could, on
the contrary, lay great stress on the peculiarawkwardnessof this post-Schopenhauerian Pessimism—Germans
evidently do not behave themselves
there as in their element. I do not at all allude
here to Eduard von Hartmann; on the contrary,
my old suspicion is not vanished even at present
that he istoo cleverfor us; I mean to say that as
arrant rogue from the very first, he did not perhaps
make merry solely over German Pessimism—and
that in the end he might probably "bequeathe"to them the truth as to how far a person could
bamboozle the Germans themselves in the age of
bubble companies. But further, are we perhaps
to reckon to the honour of Germans, the old
humming-top, Bahnsen, who all his life spun about
with the greatest pleasure around his realistically
dialectic misery and "personal ill-luck,"—wasthatGerman? (In passing I recommend his writings
for the purpose for which I myself have used them,
as anti-pessimistic fare, especially on account of hiselegantia psychologica, which, it seems to me, could
alleviate even the most constipated body and soul).
Or would it be proper to count such dilettanti and
old maids as the mawkish apostle of virginity,
Mainländer, among the genuine Germans? After
all he was probably a Jew (all Jews become
mawkish when they moralise). Neither Bahnsen,
nor Mainländer, nor even Eduard von Hartmann,
give us a reliable grasp of the question whether the
pessimism of Schopenhauer (his frightened glance
into an undeified world, which has become stupid,
blind, deranged and problematic, hishonourablefright) was not only an exceptional case among
Germans, but aGermanevent: while everything
else which stands in the foreground, like our
valiant politics and our joyful Jingoism (which
decidedly enough regards everything with reference
to a principle sufficiently unphilosophical:
"Deutschland, Deutschland, über Alles,"[12]consequentlysub specie speciei, namely, the Germanspecies), testifies very plainly to the contrary. No!The Germans of to-day arenotpessimists! And
Schopenhauer was a pessimist, I repeat it once
more, as a good European, andnotas a German.358.The Peasant Revolt of the Spirit.—We Europeans
find ourselves in view of an immense world of ruins,
where some things still tower aloft, while other
objects stand mouldering and dismal, where most
things however already lie on the ground, picturesque
enough—where were there ever finer
ruins?—overgrown with weeds, large and small.
It is the Church which is this city of decay: we
see the religious organisation of Christianity
shaken to its deepest foundations. The belief in
God is overthrown, the belief in the Christian
ascetic ideal is now fighting its last fight. Such a
long and solidly built work as Christianity—it was
the last construction of the Romans!—could not
of course be demolished all at once; every sort
of earthquake had to shake it, every sort of spirit
which perforates, digs, gnaws and moulders had
to assist in the work of destruction. But that
which is strangest is that those who have exerted
themselves most to retain and preserve Christianity,
have been precisely those who did most to destroy
it,—the Germans. It seems that the Germans do
not understand the essence of a Church. Are they
not spiritual enough, or not distrustful enough to
do so? In any case the structure of the Church
rests on asouthernfreedom and liberality of spirit,
and similarly on a southern suspicion of nature,
man, and spirit,—it rests on a knowledge of man,an experience of man, entirely different from what
the north has had. The Lutheran Reformation
in all its length and breadth was the indignation
of the simple against something "complicated."
To speak cautiously, it was a coarse, honest misunderstanding,
in which much is to be forgiven,—people
did not understand the mode of expression
of avictoriousChurch, and only saw corruption;
they misunderstood the noble scepticism, theluxuryof scepticism and toleration which every victorious,
self-confident power permits.... One overlooks
the fact readily enough at present that as regards
all cardinal questions concerning power Luther
was badly endowed; he was fatally short-sighted,
superficial and imprudent—and above all, as a
man sprung from the people, he lacked all the
hereditary qualities of a ruling caste, and all the
instincts for power; so that his work, his intention
to restore the work of the Romans, merely became
involuntarily and unconsciously the commencement
of a work of destruction. He unravelled, he tore
asunder with honest rage, where the old spider had
woven longest and most carefully. He gave the
sacred books into the hands of everyone,—they
thereby got at last into the hands of the philologists,
that is to say, the annihilators of every belief based
upon books. He demolished the conception of
"the Church" in that he repudiated the belief in
the inspiration of the Councils: for only under the
supposition that the inspiring spirit which had
founded the Church still lives in it, still builds it,
still goes on building its house, does the conception
of "the Church" retain its power. He gave backto the priest sexual intercourse: but three-fourths
of the reverence of which the people (and above
all the women of the people) are capable, rests on
the belief that an exceptional man in this respect
will also be an exceptional man in other respects.
It is precisely here that the popular belief in something
superhuman in man, in a miracle, in the
saving God in man, has its most subtle and insidious
advocate. After Luther had given a wife to
the priest, he hadto take from himauricular confession;
that was psychologically right: but thereby he
practically did away with the Christian priest himself,
whose profoundest utility has ever consisted
in his being a sacred ear, a silent well, and a grave
for secrets. "Every man his own priest"—behind
such formulæ and their bucolic slyness, there was
concealed in Luther the profoundest hatred of
"higher men" and the rule of "higher men," as
the Church had conceived them. Luther disowned
an ideal which he did not know how to attain,
while he seemed to combat and detest the degeneration
thereof. As a matter of fact, he, the impossible
monk, repudiated theruleof thehomines religiosi;
he consequently brought about precisely the same
thing within the ecclesiastical social order that
he combated so impatiently in the civic order,—namely
a "peasant insurrection."—As to all that
grew out of his Reformation afterwards, good and
bad, which can at present be almost counted up,—who
would be naïve enough to praise or blame
Luther simply on account of these results? He
is innocent of all; he knew not what he did.
The art of making the European spirit shallower,especially in the north, or moregood-natured, if
people would rather hear it designated by a moral
expression, undoubtedly took a clever step in
advance in the Lutheran Reformation; and similarly
there grew out of it the mobility and disquietude
of the spirit, its thirst for independence, its belief
in the right to freedom, and its "naturalness." If
people wish to ascribe to the Reformation in the
last instance the merit of having prepared and
favoured that which we at present honour as
"modern science," they must of course add that it
is also accessory to bringing about the degeneration
of the modern scholar with his lack of
reverence, of shame and of profundity; and that
it is also responsible for all naïve candour
and plain-dealing in matters of knowledge, in
short for theplebeianism of the spiritwhich is
peculiar to the last two centuries, and from which
even pessimism hitherto, has not in any way
delivered us. "Modern ideas" also belong to this
peasant insurrection of the north against the colder,
more ambiguous, more suspicious spirit of the south,
which has built itself its greatest monument in the
Christian Church. Let us not forget in the end
what a Church is, and especially, in contrast to every
"State": a Church is above all an authoritative
organisation which secures to themost spiritualmen the highest rank, andbelievesin the power of
spirituality so far as to forbid all grosser appliances
of authority. Through this alone the Church is
under all circumstances anoblerinstitution than
the State.—359.Vengeance on Intellect and other Backgrounds of
Morality.—Morality—where do you think it has
its most dangerous and rancorous advocates?—There,
for example, is an ill-constituted man, who
does not possess enough of intellect to be able to
take pleasure in it, and just enough of culture to
be aware of the fact; bored, satiated, and a self-despiser;
besides being cheated unfortunately by
some hereditary property out of the last consolation,
the "blessing of labour," the self-forgetfulness in
the "day's work"; one who is thoroughly ashamed
of his existence—perhaps also harbouring some
vices,—and who on the other hand (by means of
books to which he has no right, or more intellectual
society than he can digest), cannot help vitiating
himself more and more, and making himself vain
and irritable: such a thoroughly poisoned man—for
intellect becomes poison, culture becomes
poison, possession becomes poison, solitude becomes
poison, to such ill-constituted beings—gets at last
into a habitual state of vengeance and inclination
to vengeance.... What do you think he finds
necessary, absolutely necessary in order to give
himself the appearance in his own eyes of superiority
over more intellectual men, so as to give
himself the delight ofperfect revenge, at least in
imagination? It is alwaysmoralitythat he
requires, one may wager on it; always the big moral
words, always the high-sounding words: justice,
wisdom, holiness, virtue; always the stoicism of
gestures (how well stoicism hides what one doesnotpossess!); always the mantle of wise silence, of
affability, of gentleness, and whatever else the
idealist-mantle is called in which the incurable
self-despisers and also the incurably conceited walk
about. Let me not be misunderstood: out of such
bornenemies of the spiritthere arises now and then
that rare specimen of humanity who is honoured
by the people under the name of saint or sage: it
is out of such men that there arise those prodigies
of morality that make a noise, that make history,—St
Augustine was one of these men. Fear of the
intellect, vengeance on the intellect—Oh! how often
have these powerfully impelling vices become the
root of virtues! Yea, virtueitself!—And asking
the question among ourselves, even the philosopher's
pretension to wisdom, which has occasionally been
made here and there on the earth, the maddest
and most immodest of all pretensions,—has it not
always been, in India as well as in Greece,above all
a means of concealment? Sometimes, perhaps, from
the point of view of education which hallows so
many lies, it has been a tender regard for growing
and evolving persons, for disciples who have often to
be guarded against themselves by means of the belief
in a person (by means of an error). In most cases,
however, it is a means of concealment for a philosopher,
behind which he seeks protection, owing to
exhaustion, age, chilliness, or hardening; as a feeling
of the approaching end, as the sagacity of the instinct
which animals have before their death,—they go
apart, remain at rest, choose solitude, creep into
caves, becomewise.... What? Wisdom a means of
concealment of the philosopher from—intellect?—360.Two Kinds of Causes which are Confounded.—It
seems to me one of my most essential steps and
advances that I have learned to distinguish the
cause of the action generally from the cause of
action in a particular manner, say, in this direction,
with this aim. The first kind of cause is a quantum
of stored-up force, which waits to be used in some
manner, for some purpose; the second kind of
cause, on the contrary, is something quite unimportant
in comparison with the first, an insignificant
hazard for the most part, in conformity with
which the quantum of force in question "discharges"
itself in some unique and definite manner: the
lucifer-match in relation to the barrel of gunpowder.
Among those insignificant hazards and lucifer-matches
I count all the so-called "aims," and
similarly the still more so-called "occupations" of
people: they are relatively optional, arbitrary, and
almost indifferent in relation to the immense
quantum of force which presses on, as we have
said, to be used up in any way whatever. One
generally looks at the matter in a different manner:
one is accustomed to see theimpellingforce precisely
in the aim (object, calling, &c.), according to
a primeval error,—but it is only thedirectingforce;
the steersman and the steam have thereby been
confounded. And yet it is not even always the
steersman, the directing force.... Is the "aim,"
the "purpose," not often enough only an extenuating
pretext, an additional self-blinding of
conceit, which does not wish it to be said that theshipfollowsthe stream into which it has accidentally
run? That it "wishes" to go that way,becauseitmustgo that way? That it has a direction, sure
enough, but—not a steersman? We still require
a criticism of the conception of "purpose."361.The Problem of the Actor.—The problem of the
actor has disquieted me the longest; I was uncertain
(and am sometimes so still) whether one could
not get at the dangerous conception of "artist"—a
conception hitherto treated with unpardonable
leniency—from this point of view. Falsity with a
good conscience; delight in dissimulation breaking
forth as power, pushing aside, overflowing, and
sometimes extinguishing the so-called "character";
the inner longing to play a rôle, to assume a mask,
to put on anappearance; a surplus of capacity for
adaptations of every kind, which can no longer
gratify themselves in the service of the nearest
and narrowest utility: all that perhaps does not
pertainsolelyto the actor in himself?... Such an
instinct would develop most readily in families of
the lower class of the people, who have had to pass
their lives in absolute dependence, under shifting
pressure and constraint, who (to accommodate
themselves to their conditions, to adapt themselves
always to new circumstances) had again and again
to pass themselves off and represent themselves as
different persons,—thus having gradually qualified
themselves to adjust the mantle toeverywind,
thereby almost becoming the mantle itself, asmasters of the embodied and incarnated art of
eternally playing the game of hide and seek, which
one callsmimicryamong the animals:—until at last
this ability, stored up from generation to generation,
has become domineering, irrational and
intractable, till as instinct it begins to command
the other instincts, and begets the actor, the
"artist" (the buffoon, the pantaloon, the Jack-Pudding,
the fool, and the clown in the first place,
also the classical type of servant, Gil Blas: for in
such types one has the precursors of the artist,
and often enough even of the "genius"). Also
under higher social conditions there grows under
similar pressure a similar species of men. Only the
histrionic instinct is there for the most part held
strictly in check by another instinct, for example,
among "diplomatists";—for the rest, I should think
that it would always be open to a good diplomatist
to become a good actor on the stage, provided
his dignity "allowed" it. As regards theJews,
however, the adaptable peoplepar excellence, we
should, in conformity to this line of thought,
expect to see among them a world-historical
institution from the very beginning, for the rearing
of actors, a genuine breeding-place for actors; and
in fact the question is very pertinent just now:
what good actor at present isnot—a Jew? The
Jew also, as a born literary man, as the actual
ruler of the European press, exercises this power
on the basis of his histrionic capacity: for the
literary man is essentially an actor,—he plays
the part of "expert," of "specialist."—Finallywomen. If we consider the whole history ofwomen, are they notobligedfirst of all, and above
all to be actresses? If we listen to doctors who have
hypnotised women, or, finally, if we love them—and
let ourselves be "hypnotised" by them,—what
is always divulged thereby? That they "give
themselves airs," even when they—"give themselves."...
Woman is so artistic....362.My Belief in the Virilising of Europe.—We owe
it to Napoleon (and not at all to the French
Revolution, which had in view the "fraternity" of
the nations, and the florid interchange of good
graces among people generally) that several warlike
centuries, which have not had their like in past
history, may now follow one another—in short, that
we have entered uponthe classical age of war, war
at the same time scientific and popular, on the
grandest scale (as regards means, talents and
discipline), to which all coming millenniums will
look back with envy and awe as a work of perfection:—for
the national movement out of which
this martial glory springs, is only the counter-chocagainst Napoleon, and would not have existed
without him. To him, consequently, one will one
day be able to attribute the fact thatmanin Europe
has again got the upper hand of the merchant and
the Philistine; perhaps even of "woman" also,
who has become pampered owing to Christianity
and the extravagant spirit of the eighteenth
century, and still more owing to "modern ideas."
Napoleon, who saw in modern ideas, and accordingly
in civilisation, something like a personalenemy, has by this hostility proved himself one of
the greatest continuators of the Renaissance: he
has brought to the surface a whole block of the
ancient character, the decisive block perhaps, the
block of granite. And who knows but that this
block of ancient character will in the end get the
upper hand of the national movement, and will
have to make itself in apositivesense the heir and
continuator of Napoleon:—who, as one knows,
wantedoneEurope, which was to bemistress of
the world.—363.How each Sex has its Prejudice about Love.—Notwithstanding
all the concessions which I am
inclined to make to the monogamic prejudice, I
will never admit that we should speak ofequalrights in the love of man and woman: there are
no such equal rights. The reason is that man and
woman understand something different by the
term love,—and it belongs to the conditions of love
in both sexes that the one sex doesnotpresuppose
the same feeling, the same conception of "love," in
the other sex. What woman understands by love
is clear enough: complete surrender (not merely
devotion) of soul and body, without any motive,
without any reservation, rather with shame and
terror at the thought of a devotion restricted by
clauses or associated with conditions. In this
absence of conditions her love is precisely afaith:
woman has no other.—Man, when he loves a
woman,wantsprecisely this love from her; he
is consequently, as regards himself, furthest removed
from the prerequisites of feminine love;granted, however, that there should also be men
to whom on their side the demand for complete
devotion is not unfamiliar,—well, they are really—not
men. A man who loves like a woman becomes
thereby a slave; a woman, however, who loves like
a woman becomes thereby amore perfectwoman....
The passion of woman in its unconditional
renunciation of its own rights presupposes in fact
that there doesnotexist on the other side an equalpathos, an equal desire for renunciation: for if both
renounced themselves out of love, there would
result—well, I don't know what, perhaps ahorror
vacui? Woman wants to be taken and accepted
as a possession, she wishes to be merged in the
conceptions of "possession" and "possessed";
consequently she wants one whotakes, who does
not offer and give himself away, but who reversely
is rather to be made richer in "himself"—by the
increase of power, happiness and faith which the
woman herself gives to him. Woman gives herself,
man takes her.—I do not think one will get
over this natural contrast by any social contract,
or with the very best will to do justice, however
desirable it may be to avoid bringing the severe,
frightful, enigmatical, and unmoral elements of this
antagonism constantly before our eyes. For love,
regarded as complete, great, and full, is nature, and
as nature, is to all eternity something "unmoral."—Fidelityis accordingly included in woman's love,
it follows from the definition thereof; with man
fidelitymayreadily result in consequence of his
love, perhaps as gratitude or idiosyncrasy of taste,
and so-called elective affinity, but it does notbelong to theessenceof his love—and indeed so
little, that one might almost be entitled to speak
of a natural opposition between love and fidelity
in man, whose love is just a desire to possess, andnota renunciation and giving away; the desire to
possess, however, comes to an end every time with
the possession.... As a matter of fact it is the
more subtle and jealous thirst for possession in the
man (who is rarely and tardily convinced of having
this "possession"), which makes his love continue;
in that case it is even possible that the love may
increase after the surrender,—he does not readily
own that a woman has nothing more to "surrender"
to him.—364.The Anchorite Speaks.—The art of associating
with men rests essentially on one's skilfulness
(which presupposes long exercise) in accepting a
repast, in taking a repast in the cuisine of which
one has no confidence. Provided one comes to the
table with the hunger of a wolf everything is easy
("the worst society gives theeexperience"—as
Mephistopheles says); but one has not got this
wolf's-hunger when one needs it! Alas! how difficult
are our fellow-men to digest! First principle:
to stake one's courage as in a misfortune, to seize
boldly, to admire oneself at the same time, to take
one's repugnance between one's teeth, to cram down
one's disgust. Second principle: to "improve" one's
fellow-man, by praise for example, so that he may
begin to sweat out his self-complacency; or to seize
a tuft of his good or "interesting" qualities, and
pull at it till one gets his whole virtue out, and canput him under the folds of it. Third principle:
self-hypnotism. To fix one's eye on the object
of one's intercourse, as on a glass knob, until, ceasing
to feel pleasure or pain thereat, one falls asleep
unobserved, becomes rigid, and acquires a fixed
pose: a household recipe used in married life and
in friendship, well tested and prized as indispensable,
but not yet scientifically formulated. Its
proper name is—patience.—365.The Anchorite Speaks once more.—We also have
intercourse with "men," we also modestly put on
the clothes in which people know us (as such),
respect us and seek us; and we thereby mingle in
society, that is to say, among the disguised who
do not wish to be so called; we also do like all
prudent masqueraders, and courteously dismiss all
curiosity which has not reference merely to our
"clothes." There are however other modes and
artifices for "going about" among men and associating
with them: for example, as a ghost,—which
is very advisable when one wants to scare them,
and get rid of them easily. An example: a person
grasps at us, and is unable to seize us. That
frightens him. Or we enter by a closed door. Or
when the lights are extinguished. Or after we are
dead. The latter is the artifice ofposthumousmenpar excellence. ("What?" said such a one once impatiently,
"do you think we should delight in enduring
this strangeness, coldness, death-stillness
about us, all this subterranean, hidden, dim, undiscovered
solitude, which is called life with us, andmight just as well be called death, if we were not
conscious of whatwill ariseout of us,—and that
only after our death shall we attain toourlife and
become living, ah! very living! we posthumous
men!"—)366.At the Sight of a Learned Book.—We do not
belong to those who only get their thoughts from
books, or at the prompting of books,—it is our
custom to think in the open air, walking, leaping,
climbing, or dancing on lonesome mountains by
preference, or close to the sea, where even the paths
become thoughtful. Our first question concerning
the value of a book, a man, or a piece of music is:
Can it walk? or still better: Can it dance?...
We seldom read; we do not read the worse for that—oh,
how quickly do we divine how a person has
arrived at his thoughts:—whether sitting before an
ink-bottle with compressed belly and head bent
over the paper: oh, how quickly we are then done
with his book! The constipated bowels betray
themselves, one may wager on it, just as the atmosphere
of the room, the ceiling of the room, the
smallness of the room, betray themselves.—These
were my feelings as I was closing a straightforward,
learned book, thankful, very thankful, but also
relieved.... In the book of a learned man there is
almost always something oppressive and oppressed:
the "specialist" comes to light somewhere, his
ardour, his seriousness, his wrath, his over-estimation
of the nook in which he sits and spins, his hump—every
specialist has his hump. A learned book
also always mirrors a distorted soul: every tradedistorts. Look at our friends again with whom
we have spent our youth, after they have taken
possession of their science: alas! how the reverse
has always taken place! Alas! how they themselves
are now for ever occupied and possessed by
their science! Grown into their nook, crumpled into
unrecognisability, constrained, deprived of their
equilibrium, emaciated and angular everywhere,
perfectly round only in one place,—we are moved
and silent when we find them so. Every handicraft,
granting even that it has a golden floor,[13]has
also a leaden ceiling above it, which presses and
presses on the soul, till it is pressed into a strange
and distorted shape. There is nothing to alter
here. We need not think that it is at all possible
to obviate this disfigurement by any educational
artifice whatever. Every kind ofperfectionis purchased
at a high price on earth, where everything
is perhaps purchased too dear; one is an expert
in one's department at the price of being also a
victim of one's department. But you want to have
it otherwise—"more reasonable," above all more
convenient—is it not so, my dear contemporaries?
Very well! But then you will also immediately
get something different: that is to say, instead
of the craftsman and expert, the literary man, the
versatile, "many-sided" littérateur, who to be sure
lacks the hump—not taking account of the hump
or bow which he makes before you as the shopman
of the intellect and the "porter" of culture—, the
littérateur, whoisreally nothing, but "represents"almost everything: he plays and "represents" the
expert, he also takes it upon himself in all modestyto see that he ispaid, honoured and celebrated in
this position.—No, my learned friends! I bless
you even on account of your humps! And also
because like me you despise the littérateurs and
parasites of culture! And because you do not
know how to make merchandise of your intellect!
And have so many opinions which cannot be expressed
in money value! And because you do not
represent anything which youarenot! Because
your sole desire is to become masters of your craft;
because you reverence every kind of mastership and
ability, and repudiate with the most relentless
scorn everything of a make-believe, half-genuine,
dressed-up, virtuoso, demagogic, histrionic nature
inlitteris et artibus—all that which does not convince
you by its absolutegenuinenessof discipline
and preparatory training, or cannot stand your
test! (Even genius does not help a person to get
over such a defect, however well it may be able
to deceive with regard to it: one understands this
if one has once looked closely at our most gifted
painters and musicians,—who almost without exception,
can artificially and supplementarily appropriate
to themselves (by means of artful inventions
of style, make-shifts, and even principles), theappearanceof that genuineness, that solidity of
training and culture; to be sure, without thereby
deceiving themselves, without thereby imposing
perpetual silence on their bad consciences. For
you know well enough that all great modern artists
suffer from bad consciences?...)367.How one has to Distinguish first of all in
Works of Art.—Everything that is thought, versified,
painted and composed, yea, even built and
moulded, belongs either to monologic art, or to
art before witnesses. Under the latter there is also
to be included the apparently monologic art which
involves the belief in God, the whole lyric of prayer;
because for a pious man there is no solitude,—we,
the godless, have been the first to devise this invention.
I know of no profounder distinction in all the
perspective of the artist than this: Whether he
looks at his growing work of art (at "himself—")
with the eye of the witness; or whether he "has
forgotten the world," as is the essential thing in all
monologic art,——it restson forgetting, it is the music
of forgetting.368.The Cynic Speaks.—My objections to Wagner's
music are physiological objections. Why should I
therefore begin by disguising them under æsthetic
formulæ? My "point" is that I can no longer
breathe freely when this music begins to operate
on me; myfootimmediately becomes indignant
at it and rebels: for what it needs is time, dance
and march; it demands first of all from music the
ecstasies which are ingoodwalking, striding, leaping
and dancing. But do not my stomach, my
heart, my blood and my bowels also protest?
Do I not become hoarse unawares under its
influence? And then I ask myself what it is
really that my bodywantsfrom music generally.I believe it wants to haverelief: so that all animal
functions should be accelerated by means of light,
bold, unfettered, self-assured rhythms; so that
brazen, leaden life should be gilded by means of
golden, good, tender harmonies. My melancholy
would fain rest its head in the hiding-places and
abysses ofperfection: for this reason I need music.
What do I care for the drama! What do I care
for the spasms of its moral ecstasies, in which the
"people" have their satisfaction! What do I
care for the whole pantomimic hocus-pocus of the
actor!... It will now be divined that I am
essentially anti-theatrical at heart,—but Wagner on
the contrary, was essentially a man of the stage and
an actor, the most enthusiastic mummer-worshipper
that has ever existed, even among musicians!...
And let it be said in passing that if Wagner's
theory was that "drama is the object, and music is
only the means to it,"—hispracticeon the contrary
from beginning to end has been to the effect that
"attitude is the object, drama and even music can
never be anything else but means tothat." Music
as a means of elucidating, strengthening and intensifying
dramatic poses and the actor's appeal to the
senses, and Wagnerian drama only an opportunity
for a number of dramatic attitudes! Wagner
possessed, along with all other instincts, the dictatorial
instinct of a great actor in all and everything,
and as has been said, also as a musician.—I once
made this clear with some trouble to a thorough-going
Wagnerian, and I had reasons for adding:—"Do
be a little more honest with yourself: we are
not now in the theatre. In the theatre we are onlyhonest in the mass; as individuals we lie, we belie
even ourselves. We leave ourselves at home when
we go to the theatre; we there renounce the right
to our own tongue and choice, to our taste, and
even to our courage as we possess it and practise
it within our own four walls in relation to God and
man. No one takes his finest taste in art into the
theatre with him, not even the artist who works
for the theatre: there one is people, public,
herd, woman, Pharisee, voting animal, democrat,
neighbour, and fellow-creature; there even the
most personal conscience succumbs to the levelling
charm of the 'great multitude'; there stupidity
operates as wantonness and contagion; there the
neighbour rules, there onebecomesa neighbour...."
(I have forgotten to mention what my enlightened
Wagnerian answered to my physiological objections:
"So the fact is that you are really not
healthy enough for our music?"—)369.Juxtapositions in us.—Must we not acknowledge
to ourselves, we artists, that there is a strange
discrepancy in us; that on the one hand our taste,
and on the other hand our creative power, keep
apart in an extraordinary manner, continue apart,
and have a separate growth;—I mean to say that
they have entirely different gradations andtempiof age, youth, maturity, mellowness and rottenness?
So that, for example, a musician could all
his life create things whichcontradictall that
his ear and heart, spoilt as they are for listening,
prize, relish and prefer:—he would not even requireto be aware of the contradiction! As an
almost painfully regular experience shows, a
person's taste can easily outgrow the taste of
his power, even without the latter being thereby
paralysed or checked in its productivity. The
reverse, however, can also to some extent take
place,—and it is to this especially that I should
like to direct the attention of artists. A constant
producer, a man who is a "mother" in the grand
sense of the term, one who no longer knows or
hears of anything except pregnancies and child-beds
of his spirit, who has no time at all to reflect
and make comparisons with regard to himself and
his work, who is also no longer inclined to exercise
his taste, but simply forgets it, letting it take its
chance of standing, lying or falling,—perhaps such
a man at last produces workson which he is then
not at all fit to pass a judgment: so that he
speaks and thinks foolishly about them and about
himself. This seems to me almost the normal
condition with fruitful artists,—nobody knows a
child worse than its parents—and the rule applies
even (to take an immense example) to the entire
Greek world of poetry and art, which was never
"conscious" of what it had done....370.What is Romanticism?—It will be remembered
perhaps, at least among my friends, that at first
I assailed the modern world with some gross
errors and exaggerations, but at any rate withhopein my heart. I recognised—who knows from what
personal experiences?—the philosophical pessimismof the nineteenth century as the symptom of a
higher power of thought, a more daring courage
and a more triumphantplenitudeof life than had
been characteristic of the eighteenth century, the
age of Hume, Kant, Condillac, and the sensualists:
so that the tragic view of things seemed to me the
peculiarluxuryof our culture, its most precious,
noble, and dangerous mode of prodigality; but
nevertheless, in view of its overflowing wealth, ajustifiableluxury. In the same way I interpreted
for myself German music as the expression of a
Dionysian power in the German soul: I thought
I heard in it the earthquake by means of which a
primeval force that had been imprisoned for ages
was finally finding vent—indifferent as to whether
all that usually calls itself culture was thereby
made to totter. It is obvious that I then misunderstood
what constitutes the veritable character
both of philosophical pessimism and of German
music,—namely, theirRomanticism. What is
Romanticism? Every art and every philosophy
may be regarded as a healing and helping appliance
in the service of growing, struggling life:
they always presuppose suffering and sufferers.
But there are two kinds of sufferers: on the one
hand those that suffer fromoverflowing vitality, who
need Dionysian art, and require a tragic view and
insight into life; and on the other hand those who
suffer fromreduced vitality, who seek repose, quietness,
calm seas, and deliverance from themselves
through art or knowledge, or else intoxication,
spasm, bewilderment and madness. All Romanticism
in art and knowledge responds to the twofoldcraving of thelatter; to them Schopenhauer as well
as Wagner responded (and responds),—to name
those most celebrated and decided romanticists who
were thenmisunderstoodby me (nothowever to their
disadvantage, as may be reasonably conceded to
me). The being richest in overflowing vitality,
the Dionysian God and man, may not only allow
himself the spectacle of the horrible and questionable,
but even the fearful deed itself, and all the
luxury of destruction, disorganisation and negation.
With him evil, senselessness and ugliness seem as
it were licensed, in consequence of the overflowing
plenitude of procreative, fructifying power, which
can convert every desert into a luxuriant orchard.
Conversely, the greatest sufferer, the man poorest
in vitality, would have most need of mildness, peace
and kindliness in thought and action: he would
need, if possible, a God who is specially the God
of the sick, a "Saviour"; similarly he would have
need of logic, the abstract intelligibility of existence—for
logic soothes and gives confidence;—in
short he would need a certain warm, fear-dispelling
narrowness and imprisonment within optimistic
horizons. In this manner I gradually began to
understand Epicurus, the opposite of a Dionysian
pessimist;—in a similar manner also the "Christian,"
who in fact is only a type of Epicurean, and like
him essentially a romanticist:—and my vision has
always become keener in tracing that most difficult
and insidious of all forms ofretrospective
inference, which most mistakes have been made—the
inference from the work to its author, from
the deed to its doer, from the ideal to him whoneedsit, from every mode of thinking and valuing
to the imperativewantbehind it.—In regard to all
æsthetic values I now avail myself of this radical
distinction: I ask in every single case, "Has hunger
or superfluity become creative here?" At the outset
another distinction might seem to recommend
itself more—it is far more conspicuous,—namely,
to have in view whether the desire for rigidity, for
perpetuation, forbeingis the cause of the creating,
or the desire for destruction, for change, for the
new, for the future—forbecoming. But when looked
at more carefully, both these kinds of desire prove
themselves ambiguous, and are explicable precisely
according to the before-mentioned and, as it seems
to me, rightly preferred scheme. The desire fordestruction, change and becoming, may be the
expression of overflowing power, pregnant with
futurity (myterminusfor this is of course the word
"Dionysian"); but it may also be the hatred of the
ill-constituted, destitute and unfortunate, which
destroys, andmustdestroy, because the enduring,
yea, all that endures, in fact all being, excites and
provokes it. To understand this emotion we have
but to look closely at our anarchists. The will
toperpetuationrequires equally a double interpretation.
It may on the one hand proceed from
gratitude and love:—art of this origin will always
be an art of apotheosis, perhaps dithyrambic, as
with Rubens, mocking divinely, as with Hafiz, or
clear and kind-hearted as with Goethe, and spreading
a Homeric brightness and glory over everything
(in this case I speak ofApollonianart). It
may also, however, be the tyrannical will of asorely-suffering, struggling or tortured being, who
would like to stamp his most personal, individual
and narrow characteristics, the very idiosyncrasy
of his suffering, as an obligatory law and
constraint on others; who, as it were, takes
revenge on all things, in that he imprints, enforces
and brandshisimage, the image ofhistorture,
upon them. The latter isromantic pessimismin
its most extreme form, whether it be as Schopenhauerian
will-philosophy, or as Wagnerian music:—romantic
pessimism, the lastgreatevent in the
destiny of our civilisation. (That theremay bequite a different kind of pessimism, a classical
pessimism—this presentiment and vision belongs
to me, as something inseparable from me, as mypropriumandipsissimum; only that the word
"classical" is repugnant to my ears, it has become
far too worn; too indefinite and indistinguishable.
I call that pessimism of the future,—for it
is coming! I see it coming!—Dionysianpessimism.)371.We Unintelligible Ones.—Have we ever complained
among ourselves of being misunderstood,
misjudged, and confounded with others; of being
calumniated, misheard, and not heard? That is just
our lot—alas, for a long time yet! say, to be modest,
until 1901—, it is also our distinction; we should not
have sufficient respect for ourselves if we wished
it otherwise. People confound us with others—the
reason of it is that we ourselves grow, we
change continually, we cast off old bark, we still
slough every spring, we always become younger,higher, stronger, as men of the future, we thrust
our roots always more powerfully into the deep—into
evil—, while at the same time we embrace
the heavens ever more lovingly, more extensively,
and suck in their light ever more eagerly with
all our branches and leaves. We grow like trees—that
is difficult to understand, like all life!—not
in one place, but everywhere, not in one direction
only, but upwards and outwards, as well as inwards
and downwards. At the same time our force
shoots forth in stem, branches, and roots; we are
really no longer free to do anything separately, or
tobeanything separately.... Such is our lot, as
we have said: we grow inheight; and even should
it be our calamity—for we dwell ever closer to
the lightning!—well, we honour it none the less
on that account; it is that which we do not wish
to share with others, which we do not wish to
bestow upon others, the fate of all elevation,ourfate....372.Why we are not Idealists.—Formerly philosophers
were afraid of the senses: have we, perhaps, been
far too forgetful of this fear? We are at present
all of us sensualists, we representatives of the
present and of the future in philosophy,—notaccording to theory, however, but inpraxis, in
practice.... Those former philosophers, on the
contrary, thought that the senses lured them out
oftheirworld, the cold realm of "ideas," to a dangerous
southern island, where they were afraid that
their philosopher-virtues would melt away like snow
in the sun. "Wax in the ears," was then almost acondition of philosophising; a genuine philosopher
no longer listened to life, in so far as life is music,
hedeniedthe music of life—it is an old philosophical
superstition that all music is Sirens' music.—Now
we should be inclined at the present day to
judge precisely in the opposite manner (which in
itself might be just as false), and to regardideas,
with their cold, anæmic appearance, and not even
in spite of this appearance, as worse seducers
than the senses. They have always lived on the
"blood" of the philosopher, they always consumed
his senses, and indeed, if you will believe me,
his "heart" as well. Those old philosophers were
heartless: philosophising was always a species of
vampirism. At the sight of such figures even as
Spinoza, do you not feel a profoundly enigmatical
and disquieting sort of impression? Do you
not see the drama which is here performed, the
constantlyincreasing pallor—, the spiritualisation
always more ideally displayed? Do you not
imagine some long-concealed blood-sucker in the
background, which makes its beginning with the
senses, and in the end retains or leaves behind
nothing but bones and their rattling?—I mean
categories, formulæ, andwords(for you will pardon
me in saying that whatremainsof Spinoza,amor
intellectualis dei, is rattling and nothing more!
What isamor, what isdeus, when they have lost
every drop of blood?...)In summa: all philosophical
idealism has hitherto been something like
a disease, where it has not been, as in the case of
Plato, the prudence of superabundant and dangerous
healthfulness, the fear ofoverpowerfulsenses,and the wisdom of a wise Socratic.—Perhaps, is it
the case that we moderns are merely not sufficiently
soundto requirePlato's idealism? And we do not
fear the senses because——.373."Science" as Prejudice.—It follows from the
laws of class distinction that the learned, in so
far as they belong to the intellectual middle-class,
are debarred from getting even a sight of the reallygreatproblems and notes of interrogation. Besides,
their courage, and similarly their outlook, does not
reach so far,—and above all, their need, which
makes them investigators, their innate anticipation
and desire that things should be constitutedin such
and such a way, their fears and hopes are too soon
quieted and set at rest. For example, that which
makes the pedantic Englishman, Herbert Spencer,
so enthusiastic in his way, and impels him to
draw a line of hope, a horizon of desirability, the
final reconciliation of "egoism and altruism" of
which he dreams,—that almost causes nausea to
people like us:—a humanity with such Spencerian
perspectives as ultimate perspectives would seem
to us deserving of contempt, of extermination!
But thefactthat something has to be taken by
him as his highest hope, which is regarded, and
may well be regarded, by others merely as a
distasteful possibility, is a note of interrogation
which Spencer could not have foreseen.... It is
just the same with the belief with which at present
so many materialistic natural-scientists are content,
the belief in a world which is supposed to have itsequivalent and measure in human thinking and
human valuations, a "world of truth" at which we
might be able ultimately to arrive with the help
of our insignificant, four-cornered human reason!
What? do we actually wish to have existence
debased in that fashion to a ready-reckoner
exercise and calculation for stay-at-home mathematicians?
We should not, above all, seek to
divest existence of itsambiguouscharacter:goodtaste forbids it, gentlemen, the taste of reverence
for everything that goes beyond your horizon!
That a world-interpretation is alone right by whichyoumaintain your position, by which investigation
and work can go on scientifically inyoursense
(you really meanmechanically?), an interpretation
which acknowledges numbering, calculating, weighing,
seeing and handling, and nothing more—such
an idea is a piece of grossness and naïvety, provided
it is not lunacy and idiocy. Would the
reverse not be quite probable, that the most superficial
and external characters of existence—its most
apparent quality, its outside, its embodiment—should
let themselves be apprehended first? perhaps
alone allow themselves to be apprehended?
A "scientific" interpretation of the world as you
understand it might consequently still be one of
thestupidestthat is to say, the most destitute
of significance, of all possible world-interpretations:—I
say this in confidence to my friends the
Mechanicians, who to-day like to hobnob with
philosophers, and absolutely believe that mechanics
is the teaching of the first and last laws upon which,
as upon a ground-floor, all existence must bebuilt. But an essentially mechanical world would
be an essentiallymeaninglessworld! Supposing we
valued theworthof a music with reference to how
much it could be counted, calculated, or formulated—how
absurd such a "scientific" estimate of music
would be! What would one have apprehended,
understood, or discerned in it! Nothing, absolutely
nothing of what is really "music" in it!...374.Our new "Infinite."—How far the perspective
character of existence extends, or whether it have
any other character at all, whether an existence
without explanation, without "sense" does not
just become "nonsense," whether, on the other
hand, all existence is not essentially anexplainingexistence—these questions, as is right and proper,
cannot be determined even by the most diligent
and severely conscientious analysis and self-examination
of the intellect, because in this
analysis the human intellect cannot avoid seeing
itself in its perspective forms, andonlyin them.
We cannot see round our corner: it is hopeless
curiosity to want to know what other modes of
intellect and perspective theremightbe: for
example, whether any kind of being could perceive
time backwards, or alternately forwards and backwards
(by which another direction of life and another
conception of cause and effect would be given).
But I think that we are to-day at least far from
the ludicrous immodesty of decreeing from our
nook that therecanonly be legitimate perspectives
from that nook. The world, on the contrary, hasonce more become "infinite" to us: in so far we
cannot dismiss the possibility that itcontains
infinite interpretations. Once more the great horror
seizes us—but who would desire forthwith to deify
once morethismonster of an unknown world in
the old fashion? And perhaps worshiptheunknown
thing asthe"unknown person" in future? Ah!
there are too manyungodlypossibilities of interpretation
comprised in this unknown, too much
devilment, stupidity and folly of interpretation.—also
our own human, all too human interpretation
itself, which we know....375.Why we Seem to be Epicureans.—We are cautious,
we modern men, with regard to final convictions,
our distrust lies in wait for the enchantments and
tricks of conscience involved in every strong
belief, in every absolute Yea and Nay: how is this
explained? Perhaps one may see in it a good
deal of the caution of the "burnt child," of the
disillusioned idealist; but one may also see in it
another and better element, the joyful curiosity
of a former lingerer in the corner, who has
been brought to despair by his nook, and now
luxuriates and revels in its antithesis, in the unbounded,
in the "open air in itself." Thus there
is developed an almost Epicurean inclination for
knowledge, which does not readily lose sight of
the questionable character of things; likewise
also a repugnance to pompous moral phrases and
attitudes, a taste that repudiates all coarse, square
contrasts, and is proudly conscious of its habitualreserve. Forthis tooconstitutes our pride, this
easy tightening of the reins in our headlong impulse
after certainty, this self-control of the rider in
his most furious riding: for now, as of old we have
mad, fiery steeds under us, and if we delay, it is
certainly least of all the danger which causes us
to delay....376.Our Slow Periods.—It is thus that artists feel,
and all men of "works," the maternal species of
men: they always believe at every chapter of their
life—a work always makes a chapter—that they
have already reached the goal itself; they would
always patiently accept death with the feeling:
"we are ripe for it." This is not the expression
of exhaustion,—but rather that of a certain
autumnal sunniness and mildness, which the work
itself, the maturing of the work, always leaves
behind in its originator. Then thetempoof life
slows down—turns thick and flows with honey—into
long pauses, into the belief inthelong pause....377.We Homeless Ones.—Among the Europeans of
to-day there are not lacking those who may call
themselves homeless ones in a way which is at once
a distinction and an honour; it is by them that my
secret wisdom andgaya scienzais expressly to be
laid to heart. For their lot is hard, their hope uncertain;
it is a clever feat to devise consolation for
them. But what good does it do! We children of
the future, howcouldwe be at home in the present?We are unfavourable to all ideals which could
make us feel at home in this frail, broken-down,
transition period; and as regards the "realities"
thereof, we do not believe in theirendurance. The
ice which still carries us has become very thin: the
thawing wind blows; we ourselves, the homeless
ones, are an influence that breaks the ice, and the
other all too thin "realities."... We "preserve"
nothing, nor would we return to any past age; we
are not at all "liberal," we do not labour for "progress,"
we do not need first to stop our ears to
the song of the market-place and the sirens of
the future—their song of "equal rights," "free
society," "no longer either lords or slaves," does
not allure us! We do not by any means think it
desirable that the kingdom of righteousness and
peace should be established on earth (because
under any circumstances it would be the
kingdom of the profoundest mediocrity and
Chinaism); we rejoice in all men, who, like ourselves,
love danger, war and adventure, who do
not make compromises, nor let themselves
be captured, conciliated and stunted; we count
ourselves among the conquerors; we ponder over
the need of a new order of things, even of a new
slavery—for every strengthening and elevation of the
type "man" also involves a new form of slavery.
Is it not obvious that with all this we must feel ill
at ease in an age which claims the honour of being
the most humane, gentle and just that the sun has
ever seen? What a pity that at the mere mention
of these fine words, the thoughts at the back
of our minds are all the more unpleasant, that wesee therein only the expression—or the masquerade—of
profound weakening, exhaustion, age, and declining
power! What can it matter to us with what
kind of tinsel an invalid decks out his weakness?
He may parade it as hisvirtue; there is no doubt
whatever that weakness makes people gentle, alas,
so gentle, so just, so inoffensive, so "humane"!—The
"religion of pity," to which people would like
to persuade us—yes, we know sufficiently well the
hysterical little men and women who need this
religion at present as a cloak and adornment!
We are no humanitarians; we should not dare to
speak of our "love of mankind"; for that, a person
of our stamp is not enough of an actor! Or not
sufficiently Saint-Simonist, not sufficiently French.
A person must have been affected with aGallicexcess of erotic susceptibility and amorous impatience
even to approach mankind honourably
with his lewdness.... Mankind! Was there
ever a more hideous old woman among all old
women (unless perhaps it were "the Truth": a
question for philosophers)? No, we do not love
Mankind! On the other hand, however, we are not
nearly "German" enough (in the sense in which the
word "German" is current at present) to advocate
nationalism and race-hatred, or take delight in the
national heart-itch and blood-poisoning, on account
of which the nations of Europe are at present
bounded off and secluded from one another as if
by quarantines. We are too unprejudiced for that,
too perverse, too fastidious; also too well-informed,
and too much "travelled." We prefer much rather
to live on mountains, apart and "out of season," inpast or coming centuries, in order merely to spare
ourselves the silent rage to which we know we
should be condemned as witnesses of a system of
politics which makes the German nation barren
by making it vain, and which is apettysystem besides:—will it not be necessary for
this system to plant itself between two mortal
hatreds, lest its own creation should immediately
collapse? Will it notbe obligedto desire
the perpetuation of the petty-state system of
Europe?... We homeless ones are too diverse
and mixed in race and descent as "modern
men," and are consequently little tempted to
participate in the falsified racial self-admiration
and lewdness which at present display themselves
in Germany, as signs of German sentiment, and
which strike one as doubly false and unbecoming
in the people with the "historical sense." We are,
in a word—and it shall be our word of honour!—good
Europeans, the heirs of Europe, the rich, over-wealthy
heirs, also the too deeply pledged heirs
of millenniums of European thought. As such,
we have also outgrown Christianity, and are
disinclined to it—and just because we have
grownout ofit, because our forefathers were
Christians uncompromising in their Christian integrity,
who willingly sacrificed possessions and
positions, blood and country, for the sake of their
belief. We—do the same. For what, then? For
our unbelief? For all sorts of unbelief? Nay, you
know better than that, my friends! The hiddenYeain you is stronger than all the Nays and
Perhapses, of which you and your age are sick;and when you are obliged to put out to sea, you
emigrants, it is—once more afaithwhich urges
you thereto!...378."And once more Grow Clear."—We, the generous
and rich in spirit, who stand at the sides of the
streets like open fountains and would hinder no
one from drinking from us: we do not know,
alas! how to defend ourselves when we should
like to do so; we have no means of preventing
ourselves being madeturbidand dark,—we have
no means of preventing the age in which we live
casting its "up-to-date rubbish" into us, nor of
hindering filthy birds throwing their excrement,
the boys their trash, and fatigued resting travellers
their misery, great and small, into us. But we
do as we have always done: we take whatever
is cast into us down into our depths—for we
are deep, we do not forget—and once more grow
clear....379.The Fool's Interruption.—It is not a misanthrope
who has written this book: the hatred of men costs
too dear to-day. To hate as they formerly hatedman, in the fashion of Timon, completely, without
qualification, with all the heart, from the pureloveof hatred—for that purpose one would have to
renounce contempt:—and how much refined
pleasure, how much patience, how much benevolence
even, do we owe to contempt! Moreover
we are thereby the "elect of God": refined contempt
is our taste and privilege, our art, our virtueperhaps, we, the most modern amongst the
moderns!... Hatred, on the contrary, makes
equal, it puts men face to face, in hatred there is
honour; finally, in hatred there isfear, quite a
large amount of fear. We fearless ones, however,
we, the most intellectual men of the period,
know our advantage well enough to live without
fear as the most intellectual persons of this age.
People will not easily behead us, shut us up,
or banish us; they will not even ban or burn
our books. The age loves intellect, it loves us,
and needs us, even when we have to give it to
understand that we are artists in despising; that
all intercourse with men is something of a horror
to us; that with all our gentleness, patience,
humanity and courteousness, we cannot persuade
our nose to abandon its prejudice against the
proximity of man; that we love nature the more,
the less humanly things are done by her, and
that we love artwhenit is the flight of the artist
from man, or the raillery of the artist at man, or the
raillery of the artist at himself....380."The Wanderer" Speaks.—In order for once to
get a glimpse of our European morality from a
distance, in order to compare it with other earlier
or future moralities, one must do as the traveller
who wants to know the height of the towers of
a city: for that purpose heleavesthe city.
"Thoughts concerning moral prejudices," if they
are not to be prejudices concerning prejudices,
presuppose a positionoutside ofmorality, somesort of world beyond good and evil, to which
one must ascend, climb, or fly—and in the given
case at any rate, a position beyondourgood and
evil, an emancipation from all "Europe," understood
as a sum of inviolable valuations which have
become part and parcel of our flesh and blood.
That onewantsin fact to get outside, or aloft,
is perhaps a sort of madness, a peculiarly unreasonable
"thou must"—for even we thinkers
have our idiosyncrasies of "unfree will"—: the
question is whether onecanreally get there. That
may depend on manifold conditions: in the main
it is a question of how light or how heavy we
are, the problem of our "specific gravity." One
must bevery lightin order to impel one's will to
knowledge to such a distance, and as it were beyond
one's age, in order to create eyes for oneself for the
survey of millenniums, and a pure heaven in these
eyes besides! One must have freed oneself from
many things by which we Europeans of to-day are
oppressed, hindered, held down, and made heavy.
The man of such a "Beyond," who wants to get
even in sight of the highest standards of worth of
his age, must first of all "surmount" this age in himself—it
is the test of his power—and consequently
not only his age, but also his past aversion and
oppositiontohis age, his sufferingcaused byhis
age, his unseasonableness, his Romanticism....381.The Question of Intelligibility.—One not only
wants to be understood when one writes, but also—quite
as certainly—notto be understood. It isby no means an objection to a book when someone
finds it unintelligible: perhaps this might just have
been the intention of its author,—perhaps he did
notwantto be understood by "anyone." A
distinguished intellect and taste, when it wants to
communicate its thoughts, always selects its hearers;
by selecting them, it at the same time closes its
barriers against "the others." It is there that all
the more refined laws of style have their origin:
they at the same time keep off, they create distance,
they prevent "access" (intelligibility, as we have
said,)—while they open the ears of those who
are acoustically related to them. And to say it
between ourselves and with reference to my own
case,—I do not desire that either my ignorance, or
the vivacity of my temperament, should prevent me
being understood byyou, my friends: I certainly
do not desire that my vivacity should have that
effect, however much it may impel me to arrive
quickly at an object, in order to arrive at it at all.
For I think it is best to do with profound problems
as with a cold bath—quickly in, quickly out. That
one does not thereby get into the depths, that one
does not get deep enoughdown—is a superstition
of the hydrophobic, the enemies of cold water; they
speak without experience. Oh! the great cold
makes one quick!—And let me ask by the way:
Is it a fact that a thing has been misunderstood
and unrecognised when it has only been touched
upon in passing, glanced at, flashed at? Must
one absolutely sit upon it in the first place?
Must one have brooded on it as on an egg?Diu
noctuque incubando, as Newton said of himself? Atleast there are truths of a peculiar shyness and
ticklishness which one can only get hold of suddenly,
and in no other way,—which one must eithertake
by surprise, or leave alone.... Finally, my brevity
has still another value: on those questions which
pre-occupy me, I must say a great deal briefly, in
order that it may be heard yet more briefly. For
as immoralist, one has to take care lest one ruins
innocence, I mean the asses and old maids of both
sexes, who get nothing from life but their innocence;
moreover my writings are meant to fill
them with enthusiasm, to elevate them, to encourage
them in virtue. I should be at a loss to know of
anything more amusing than to see enthusiastic
old asses and maids moved by the sweet feelings
of virtue: and "that have I seen"—spake Zarathustra.
So much with respect to brevity; the
matter stands worse as regards my ignorance, of
which I make no secret to myself. There are hours
in which I am ashamed of it; to be sure there are
likewise hours in which I am ashamed of this
shame. Perhaps we philosophers, all of us, are
badly placed at present with regard to knowledge:
science is growing, the most learned of us are on
the point of discovering that we know too little.
But it would be worse still if it were otherwise,—if
we knew too much; our duty is and remains,
first of all, not to get into confusion about
ourselves. Wearedifferent from the learned;
although it cannot be denied that amongst other
things we are also learned. We have different
needs, a different growth, a different digestion: we
need more, we need also less. There is no formulaas to how much an intellect needs for its nourishment;
if, however, its taste be in the direction of
independence, rapid coming and going, travelling,
and perhaps adventure for which only the swiftest
are qualified, it prefers rather to live free on poor
fare, than to be unfree and plethoric. Not fat, but
the greatest suppleness and power is what a good
dancer wishes from his nourishment,—and I know
not what the spirit of a philosopher would like
better than to be a good dancer. For the dance
is his ideal, and also his art, in the end likewise his
sole piety, his "divine service."...