382.Great Healthiness.—We, the new, the nameless,
the hard-to-understand, we firstlings of a yet
untried future—we require for a new end also a
new means, namely, a new healthiness, stronger,
sharper, tougher, bolder and merrier than any
healthiness hitherto. He whose soul longs to experience
the whole range of hitherto recognised
values and desirabilities, and to circumnavigate all
the coasts of this ideal "Mediterranean Sea," who,
from the adventures of his most personal experience,
wants to know how it feels to be a conqueror, and
discoverer of the ideal—as likewise how it is with
the artist, the saint, the legislator, the sage, the
scholar, the devotee, the prophet, and the godly
Nonconformist of the old style:—requires one
thing above all for that purpose,great healthiness—such
healthiness as one not only possesses, but
also constantly acquires and must acquire, because
one continually sacrifices it again, and must sacrificeit!—And now, after having been long on the
way in this fashion, we Argonauts of the ideal, who
are more courageous perhaps than prudent, and often
enough shipwrecked and brought to grief, nevertheless,
as said above, healthier than people would
like to admit, dangerously healthy, always healthy
again,—it would seem, as if in recompense for it
all, that we have a still undiscovered country before
us, the boundaries of which no one has yet seen,
a beyond to all countries and corners of the
ideal known hitherto, a world so over-rich in the
beautiful, the strange, the questionable, the frightful,
and the divine, that our curiosity as well as our
thirst for possession thereof, have got out of hand—alas!
that nothing will now any longer satisfy us!
How could we still be content withthe man of
the present dayafter such peeps, and with such a
craving in our conscience and consciousness?
What a pity; but it is unavoidable that we should
look on the worthiest aims and hopes of the man
of the present day with ill-concealed amusement,
and perhaps should no longer look at them.
Another ideal runs on before us, a strange, tempting
ideal, full of danger, to which we should not like
to persuade any one, because we do not so readily
acknowledge any one'sright thereto: the ideal
of a spirit who plays naïvely (that is to say
involuntarily and from overflowing abundance and
power) with everything that has hitherto been
called holy, good, inviolable, divine; to whom the
loftiest conception which the people have reasonably
made their measure of value, would already
imply danger, ruin, abasement, or at least relaxation,blindness, or temporary self-forgetfulness; the ideal
of a humanly superhuman welfare and benevolence,
which may often enough appearinhuman, for
example, when put by the side of all past seriousness
on earth, and in comparison with all past
solemnities in bearing, word, tone, look, morality
and pursuit, as their truest involuntary parody,—
but with which, nevertheless, perhapsthe great
seriousnessonly commences, the proper interrogation
mark is set up, the fate of the soul changes,
the hour-hand moves, and tragedybegins....383.Epilogue.—But while I slowly, slowly finish the
painting of this sombre interrogation-mark, and am
still inclined to remind my readers of the virtues of
right reading—oh, what forgotten and unknown
virtues—it comes to pass that the wickedest,
merriest, gnome-like laughter resounds around me:
the spirits of my book themselves pounce upon me,
pull me by the ears, and call me to order. "We
cannot endure it any longer," they shout to me,
"away, away with this raven-black music. Is it
not clear morning round about us? And green, soft
ground and turf, the domain of the dance? Was
there ever a better hour in which to be joyful?
Who will sing us a song, a morning song, so sunny,
so light and so fledged that it willnotscare the
tantrums,—but will rather invite them to take part
in the singing and dancing. And better a simple
rustic bagpipe than such weird sounds, such toad-croakings,
grave-voices and marmot-pipings, with
which you have hitherto regaled us in your wilderness,Mr Anchorite and Musician of the Future!
No! Not such tones! But let us strike up something
more agreeable and more joyful!"—You
would like to have it so, my impatient friends?
Well! Who would not willingly accord with your
wishes? My bagpipe is waiting, and my voice
also—it may sound a little hoarse; take it as it is!
don't forget we are in the mountains! But what
you will hear is at least new; and if you do not
understand it, if you misunderstand thesinger,
what does it matter! That—has always been "The
Singer's Curse."[14]So much the more distinctly can
you hear his music and melody, so much the better
also can you—dance to his piping.Would you liketo do that?...