[pg v]Introduction.When Nietzsche
        called his bookThe Dawn of Day, he was far from
        giving it a merely fanciful title to attract the attention of that
        large section of the public which judges books by their titles rather
        than by their contents.The Dawn of Dayrepresents,
        figuratively, the dawn of Nietzsche's own philosophy. Hitherto he had
        been considerably influenced in his outlook, if not in his actual
        thoughts, by Schopenhauer, Wagner, and perhaps also Comte.Human,
        all-too-Human, belongs to a period of transition. After
        his rupture with Bayreuth, Nietzsche is, in both parts of that work,
        trying to stand on his own legs, and to regain his spiritual freedom;
        he is feeling his way to his own philosophy.The Dawn of
        Day, written in 1881 under the invigorating influence
        of a Genoese spring, is the dawn of this new Nietzsche.“With this book I open my campaign against
        morality,”he himself said later in his autobiography, theEcce
        Homo.Just as in the
        case of the books written in his prime—The Joyful
        Wisdom,Zarathustra,Beyond Good and
        Evil, andThe Genealogy of Morals—we cannot
        fail to be impressed in this work by Nietzsche's deep psychological
        insight, the insight that showed him to be a powerful judge of men
        and things unequalled in the nineteenth or, perhaps, any[pg vi]other century. One example of this is
        seen in his searching analysis of the Apostle Paul (Aphorism68), in which the soul of the“First Christian”is ruthlessly and
        realistically laid bare to us. Nietzsche's summing-up of the Founder
        of Christianity—for of course, as is now generally recognised, it was
        Paul, and not Christ, who founded the Christian Church—has not yet
        called forth those bitter attacks from theologians that might have
        been expected, though one reason for this apparent neglect is no
        doubt that the portrait is so true, and in these circumstances
        silence is certainly golden on the part of defenders of the faith,
        who are otherwise, as a rule, loquacious enough. Nor has the taunt in
        Aphorism84elicited an
        answer from the quarter whither it was directed; and the“free”(not to say dishonest) interpretation of
        the Bible by Christian scholars and theologians, which is still
        proceeding merrily, is now being turned to Nietzsche's own writings.
        For the philosopher's works are now being“explained away”by German theologians in a most
        naïve and daring fashion, and with an ability which has no doubt been
        acquired as the result of centuries of skilful interpretation of the
        Holy Writ.Nor are
        professional theologians the only ones who have failed to answer
        Nietzsche; for in other than religious matters the majority of
        savants have not succeeded in plumbing his depths. There is, for
        example, the question of race. Ten years ago, twenty years after the
        publication ofThe Dawn of Day, Nietzsche's
        countrymen enthusiastically hailed a book which has recently been
        translated into English, Chamberlain'sFoundations of[pg vii]the Nineteenth Century. In this
        book the Teutons are said to be superior to all the other peoples in
        the world, the reason given being that they have kept their race
        pure. It is due to this purity of race that they have produced so
        many great men; for every“good”man
        in history is a Teuton, and every bad man something else.
        Considerable skill is exhibited by the author in filching from his
        opponents the Latins their best trump cards, and likewisethetrump
        card, Jesus Christ, from the Jews; for Jesus Christ, according to
        Chamberlain's very plausible argument, was not a Jew but an Aryan,i.e.a member of that great family
        of which the Teutons are a branch.What would
        Nietzsche have said to this legerdemain? He has constantly pointed
        out that the Teutons are so far from being a pure race that they
        have, on the contrary, done everything in their power to ruin even
        the idea of a pure race for ever. For the Teutons, through their
        Reformation and their Puritan revolt in England, and the philosophies
        developed by the democracies that necessarily followed, were the
        spiritual forbears of the French Revolution and of the Socialistic
        régime under which we are beginning to suffer nowadays. Thus this
        noble race has left nothing undone to blot out the last remnant of
        race in Europe, and it even stands in the way of the creation of a
        new race. And with such a record in history the Germans write books,
        eulogising themselves as the salt of the earth, the people of
        peoples, the race of races, while in truth they are nothing else thannouveaux-richesendeavouring to
        draw up a decent pedigree for themselves.[pg viii]We know that honesty is not a prerequisite of
        such pedigrees, and that patriotism may be considered as a good
        excuse even for a wrong pedigree; but the race-pandemonium that
        followed the publication of Mr. Chamberlain's book in Germany was
        really a very unwise proceeding in view of the false and misleading
        document produced. What, it may be asked again, would Nietzsche have
        said if he had heard his countrymen screaming odes to their own glory
        as the“flower of Europe”? He would
        assuredly have dismissed their exalted pretensions with a
        good-natured smile; for his study of history had shown him that even
        slaves must have their saturnalia now and then. But as to his
        philosophical answer there can be no doubt; for in Aphorism272ofThe Dawn of
        Daythere is a single sentence which completely refutes
        the view of modern racemongers like Chamberlain and his followers:“It is probable,”we read,“that there are no pure races, but only races
        which have become purified, and even these are extremely
        rare.”There are even stronger expressions to be met with in“Peoples and Countries”(Aphorism 20;
        see theGenealogy of Morals, p. 226):“What quagmires and mendacity must there be
        about if it is possible, in the modern European hotch-potch, to raise
        the question of‘race’!”and
        again, in Aphorism 21:“Maxim—to associate
        with no man who takes any part in the mendacious
        race-swindle.”A man like
        Nietzsche, who makes so little impression upon mankind in general, is
        certainly not, as some people have thought and openly said, a public
        danger, so the guardians of the State need not[pg ix]be uneasy. There is little danger of
        Nietzsche's revolutionising either the masses or the classes; for, as
        Goethe used to say,“Seulement celui qui
        ressemble le peuple, l'émeut.”Nietzsche's voice has as yet
        hardly been lifted in this country; and, until it is fully heard,
        both masses and classes will calmly proceed on their way to the
        extremes of democracy and anarchy, as they now appear to be doing.
        Anarchy, though, may be too strong a word; for there is some doubt
        whether, throughout Europe and America at all events, the people are
        not now too weak even for anarchy. A revolt is a sign of strength in
        a slave; but our modern slaves have no strength left.In the meantime,
        however, it will have become clear that Nietzsche tried to stop this
        threatening degradation of the human race, that he endeavoured to
        supplant the morality of altruism—the cause of this degradation—by
        another, a super-Christian morality, and that he has succeeded in
        this aim, if not where the masses and the classes are concerned, at
        any rate in the case of that small minority of thinkers to which he
        really wished to appeal. And this minority is naturally grateful to
        the philosopher for having supplied them with a morality which
        enables them to be“good”without
        being fools—an unpleasant combination which, unfortunately, the
        Nazarene morality is seldom able to avoid. This Nazarene morality has
        doubtless its own merits, and its“good”and“evil”in many cases coincide with ours; but common sense and certain
        intellectual qualities are not too highly appreciated in the table of
        Christian values (see, for instance, 1 Cor. iii. 19), whence it will
        be observed that the enlightenment[pg x]of a Christian is not always quite equal to his
        otherwise excellent intentions. We Nietzschians, however, must show
        that patience to them which they always pretend to show to their
        opponents. Nietzsche himself, indeed, recommends this in Aphorism103of this book, an
        aphorism which is almost too well known to need repetition; for it
        likewise disproves the grotesque though widely circulated supposition
        that all kinds of immorality would be indulged in under the sway of
        the“Immoralistic”philosopher:“I should not, of course, deny—unless I were a fool—that
        many actions which are called immoral should be avoided and resisted;
        and in the same way that many which are called moral should be
        performed and encouraged; but I hold that in both cases these actions
        should be performed from motives other than those which have
        prevailed up to the present time. We must learn anew in order that at
        last, perhaps very late in the day, we may be able to do something
        more: feel anew.”In regard to the
        translation itself—which owes a good deal to many excellent
        suggestions made by Mr. Thomas Common—it adheres, as a rule, closely
        to the German text; and in only two or three instances has a slightly
        freer rendering been adopted in order to make the sense quite clear.
        There are one or two cases in which a punning or double meaning could
        not be adequately rendered in English:e.g.Aphorism50, where the
        German word“Rausch”means both“intoxication”and also“elation”(i.e.the exalted feelings of the
        religious fanatic). Again, we have“Einleid,”“Einleidigkeit,”[pg xi]in Aphorism63—words which do not quite correspond to pity,
        compassion, or fellow-feeling, and which, indeed, are not yet known
        to German lexicographers. A literal translation,“one-feeling,”would be almost meaningless. What
        is actually signified is that both sufferer and sympathiser have
        nerves and feelings in common: an experience which Schopenhauer, as
        Nietzsche rightly points out, mistook for compassion or pity
        (“Mitleid”), and which lacked a word,
        even in German, until the later psychologist coined“Einleid.”Again, in Aphorism554we have a play upon the words“Vorschritt”(leading, guidance) and“Fortschritt”(progress).All these,
        however, are trifling matters in comparison with the substance of the
        book, and they are of more interest to philologists than to
        psychologists. It is for psychologists that this book was written;
        and such minds, somewhat rare in our time, may read in it with much
        profit.J. M. Kennedy.London,September1911.[pg 001]Author's Preface.In this book we
        find a“subterrestrial”at work,
        digging, mining, undermining. You can see him, always provided that
        you have eyes for such deep work,—how he makes his way slowly,
        cautiously, gently but surely, without showing signs of the weariness
        that usually accompanies a long privation of light and air. He might
        even be called happy, despite his labours in the dark. Does it not
        seem as if some faith were leading him on, some solace recompensing
        him for his toil? Or that he himself desires a long period of
        darkness, an unintelligible, hidden, enigmatic something, knowing as
        he does that he will in time have his own morning, his own
        redemption, his own rosy dawn?—Yea, verily he will return: ask him
        not what he seeketh in the depths; for he himself will tell you, this
        apparent Trophonius and subterrestrial, whensoever he once again
        becomes man. One easily unlearns how to hold one's tongue when one
        has for so long been a mole, and all alone, like him.—2.Indeed, my
          indulgent friends, I will tell you—here, in this late
          preface,1which
          might easily have[pg
          002]become an obituary or a funeral oration—what I sought in the depths
          below: for I have come back, and—I have escaped. Think not that I
          will urge you to run the same perilous risk! or that I will urge
          you on even to the same solitude! For whoever proceeds on his own
          path meets nobody: this is the feature of one's“own path.”No one comes to help him in his
          task: he must face everything quite alone—danger, bad luck,
          wickedness, foul weather. He goes his own way; and, as is only
          right, meets with bitterness and occasional irritation because he
          pursues this“own way”of his: for
          instance, the knowledge that not even his friends can guess who he
          is and whither he is going, and that they ask themselves now and
          then:“Well? Is he really moving at all?
          Has he still ... a path before him?”—At that time I had
          undertaken something which could not have been done by everybody: I
          went down into the deepest depths; I tunnelled to the very bottom;
          I started to investigate and unearth an oldfaithwhich for thousands of years we philosophers used to build on as
          the safest of all foundations—which we built on again and again
          although every previous structure fell in: I began to undermine ourfaith in
          morals. But ye do not understand me?—3.So far it is on
          Good and Evil that we have meditated least profoundly: this was
          always too dangerous a subject. Conscience, a good reputation,
          hell, and at times even the police, have not[pg 003]allowed and do not allow of
          impartiality; in the presence of morality, as before all authority,
          wemustnot even think, much less
          speak: here we must obey! Ever since the beginning of the world, no
          authority has permitted itself to be made the subject of criticism;
          and to criticise morals—to look upon morality as a problem, as
          problematic—what! was that not—isthat
          not—immoral?—But morality has at its disposal not only every means
          of intimidation wherewith to keep itself free from critical hands
          and instruments of torture: its security lies rather in a certain
          art of enchantment, in which it is a past master—it knows how to“enrapture.”It can often paralyse
          the critical will with a single look, or even seduce it to itself:
          yea, there are even cases where morality can turn the critical will
          against itself; so that then, like the scorpion, it thrusts the
          sting into its own body. Morality has for ages been an expert in
          all kinds of devilry in the art of convincing: even at the present
          day there is no orator who would not turn to it for assistance
          (only hearken to our anarchists, for instance: how morally they
          speak when they would fain convince! In the end they even call
          themselves“the good and the just”).
          Morality has shown herself to be the greatest mistress of seduction
          ever since men began to discourse and persuade on earth—and, what
          concerns us philosophers even more, she is the veritableCirce of
          philosophers. For, to what is it due that, from Plato
          onwards, all the philosophic architects in Europe have built in
          vain? that everything which they themselves honestly believed to beaere perennius[pg 004]threatens to subside or is already laid
          in ruins? Oh, how wrong is the answer which, even in our own day,
          rolls glibly off the tongue when this question is asked:“Because they have all neglected the
          prerequisite, the examination of the foundation, a critique of all
          reason”—that fatal answer made by Kant, who has certainly
          not thereby attracted us modern philosophers to firmer and less
          treacherous ground! (and, one may ask apropos of this, was it not
          rather strange to demand that an instrument should criticise its
          own value and effectiveness? that the intellect itself should“recognise”its own worth, power,
          and limits? was it not even just a little ridiculous?) The right
          answer would rather have been, that all philosophers, including
          Kant himself were building under the seductive influence of
          morality—that they aimed at certainty and“truth”only in appearance; but that in reality
          their attention was directed towards“majestic moral edifices,”to use once more Kant's innocent mode of expression, who deems it
          his“less brilliant, but not
          undeserving”task and work“to level
          the ground and prepare a solid foundation for the erection of those
          majestic moral edifices”(Critique of Pure
          Reason, ii. 257). Alas! He did not succeed in his
          aim, quite the contrary—as we must acknowledge to-day. With this
          exalted aim, Kant was merely a true son of his century, which more
          than any other may justly be called the century of exaltation: and
          this he fortunately continued to be in respect to the more valuable
          side of this century (with that solid piece of sensuality, for
          example, which he introduced into his theory of[pg 005]knowledge). He, too, had been bitten by
          the moral tarantula, Rousseau; he, too, felt weighing on his soul
          that moral fanaticism of which another disciple of Rousseau's,
          Robespierre, felt and proclaimed himself to be the executor:de fonder sur la terre l'empire de la sagesse,
          de la justice, et de la vertu. (Speech of June 4th,
          1794.) On the other hand, with such a French fanaticism in his
          heart, no one could have cultivated it in a less French, more deep,
          more thorough and more German manner—if the word German is still
          permissible in this sense—than Kant did: in order to make room forhis“moral
          kingdom,”he found himself compelled to add to it an
          indemonstrable world, a logical“beyond”—that was why he required his critique
          of pure reason! In other words,he would not have
          wanted it, if he had not deemed one thing to be more
          important than all the others: to render his moral kingdom
          unassailable by—or, better still, invisible to, reason,—for he felt
          too strongly the vulnerability of a moral order of things in the
          face of reason. For, when confronted with nature and history, when
          confronted with the ingrainedimmoralityof nature and history,
          Kant was, like all good Germans from the earliest times, a
          pessimist: he believed in morality, not because it is demonstrated
          through nature and history, but despite its being steadily
          contradicted by them. To understand this“despite,”we should perhaps recall a somewhat
          similar trait in Luther, that other great pessimist, who once urged
          it upon his friends with true Lutheran audacity:“If we could conceive by reason alone how that God who
          shows so much[pg
          006]wrath and malignity could be merciful and just, what use should we
          have for faith?”For, from the earliest times, nothing has
          ever made a deeper impression upon the German soul, nothing has
          ever“tempted”it more, than that
          deduction, the most dangerous of all, which for every true Latin is
          a sin against the intellect:credo quia absurdum est.—With it
          German logic enters for the first time into the history of
          Christian dogma; but even to-day, a thousand years later, we
          Germans of the present, late Germans in every way, catch the scent
          of truth, apossibilityof truth, at the back
          of the famous fundamental principle of dialectics with which Hegel
          secured the victory of the German spirit over Europe—“contradiction moves the world; all things contradict
          themselves.”We are pessimists—even in logic.4.But logical
          judgments are not the deepest and most fundamental to which the
          daring of our suspicion descends: the confidence in reason which is
          inseparable from the validity of these judgments, is, as
          confidence, amoralphenomenon ... perhaps
          German pessimism has yet to take its last step? Perhaps it has once
          more to draw up its“credo”opposite
          its“absurdum”in a terrible manner?
          And if this book is pessimistic even in regard to morals, even
          above the confidence in morals—should it not be a German book for
          that very reason? For, in fact, it represents a contradiction, and
          one which it does not fear: in it confidence in morals is
          retracted—but why? Out ofmorality! Or how[pg 007]shall we call that which takes place in
          it—inus? for our taste inclines to the
          employment of more modest phrases. But there is no doubt that to us
          likewise there speaketh a“thou
          shalt”; we likewise obey a strict law which is set above
          us—and this is the last cry of morals which is still audible to us,
          which we too mustlive: here, if anywhere, are we
          stillmen
          of conscience, because, to put the matter in plain
          words, we will not return to that which we look upon as decayed,
          outlived, and superseded, we will not return to something“unworthy of belief,”whether it be
          called God, virtue, truth, justice, love of one's neighbour, or
          what not; we will not permit ourselves to open up a lying path to
          old ideals; we are thoroughly and unalterably opposed to anything
          that would intercede and mingle with us; opposed to all forms of
          present-day faith and Christianity; opposed to the lukewarmness of
          all romanticism and fatherlandism; opposed also to the artistic
          sense of enjoyment and lack of principle which would fain make us
          worship where we no longer believe—for we are artists—opposed, in
          short, to all this European feminism (or idealism, if this term be
          thought preferable) which everlastingly“draws upward,”and which in consequence
          everlastingly“lowers”and“degrades.”Yet, being men ofthisconscience, we feel that we
          are related to that German uprightness and piety which dates back
          thousands of years, although we immoralists and atheists may be the
          late and uncertain offspring of these virtues—yea, we even consider
          ourselves, in a certain respect, as their heirs, the executors of
          their inmost will: a pessimistic will, as I have already[pg 008]pointed out, which
          is not afraid to deny itself, because it denies itself withjoy! In us is consummated, if you
          desire a formula—the autosuppression of morals.5.But, after all,
          why must we proclaim so loudly and with such intensity what we are,
          what we want, and what we do not want? Let us look at this more
          calmly and wisely; from a higher and more distant point of view.
          Let us proclaim it, as if among ourselves, in so low a tone that
          all the world fails to hear it andus!
          Above all, however, let us say itslowly.... This preface comes
          late, but not too late: what, after all, do five or six years
          matter? Such a book, and such a problem, are in no hurry; besides,
          we are friends of thelento,
          I and my book. I have not been a philologist in vain—perhaps I am
          one yet: a teacher of slow reading. I even come to write slowly. At
          present it is not only my habit, but even my taste—a perverted
          taste, maybe—to write nothing but what will drive to despair every
          one who is“in a hurry.”For
          philology is that venerable art which exacts from its followers one
          thing above all—to step to one side, to leave themselves spare
          moments, to grow silent, to become slow—the leisurely art of the
          goldsmith applied to language: an art which must carry out slow,
          fine work, and attains nothing if notlento. For this very reason
          philology is now more desirable than ever before; for this very
          reason it is the highest attraction and incitement in an age of“work”: that is to say, of haste, of
          unseemly and immoderate hurry-skurry,[pg 009]which is intent upon“getting things done”at once, even every book,
          whether old or new. Philology itself, perhaps, will not“get things done”so hurriedly: it
          teaches how to readwell:i.e.slowly, profoundly, attentively, prudently, with inner thoughts,
          with the mental doors ajar, with delicate fingers and eyes ... my
          patient friends, this book appeals only to perfect readers and
          philologists:learnto read me well!Ruta, near
          Genoa,Autumn,
          1886.[pg 011]