Book I.1.Subsequent
          Judgment.—All things that endure for a long time are
          little by little so greatly permeated by reason that their origin
          in unreason becomes improbable. Does not almost every exact
          statement of an origin strike us as paradoxical and sacrilegious?
          Indeed, does not the true historian constantly contradict?2.Prejudice of
          the Learned.—Savants are quite correct in maintaining
          the proposition that men in all ages believed that theyknewwhat was good and evil, praiseworthy and blamable. But it is a
          prejudice of the learned to saythat we now know it
          betterthan any other age.3.A Time for
          Everything.—When man assigned a sex to all things, he
          did not believe that he[pg
          012]was merely playing; but he thought, on the contrary, that he had
          acquired a profound insight:—it was only at a much later period,
          and then only partly, that he acknowledged the enormity of his
          error. In the same way, man has attributed a moral relationship to
          everything that exists, throwing the cloak ofethical
          significanceover the world's shoulders. One day all
          that will be of just as much value, and no more, as the amount of
          belief existing to-day in the masculinity or femininity of the
          sun.24.Against the
          Fanciful Disharmony of the Spheres.—We must once more
          sweep out of the world all thisfalsegrandeur, for it is contrary to the justice that all things about
          us may claim. And for this reason we must not see or wish the world
          to be more disharmonic than it is!5.Be
          Thankful!—The most important result of the past
          efforts of humanity is that we need no longer go about in continual
          fear of wild beasts, barbarians, gods, and our own dreams.6.The Juggler and
          his Counterpart.—That which is wonderful in science
          is contrary to that[pg
          013]which is wonderful in the art of the juggler. For the latter would
          wish to make us believe that we see a very simple causality, where,
          in reality, an exceedingly complex causality is in operation.
          Science, on the other hand, forces us to give up our belief in the
          simple causality exactly where everything looks so easily
          comprehensible and we are merely the victims of appearances. The
          simplest things arevery“complicated”—we can never be sufficiently
          astonished at them!7.Reconceiving
          Our Feeling of Space.—Is it real or imaginary things
          which have built up the greater proportion of man's happiness? It
          is certain, at all events, that the extent of the distance between
          the highest point of happiness and the lowest point of unhappiness
          has been established only with the help of imaginary things. As a
          consequence,thiskind of a conception of space
          is always, under the influence of science, becoming smaller and
          smaller: in the same way as science has taught us, and is still
          teaching us, to look upon the earth as small—yea, to look upon the
          entire solar system as a mere point.8.Transfiguration.—Perplexed
          sufferers, confused dreamers, the hysterically ecstatic—here we
          have the three classes into which Raphael divided mankind. We no
          longer consider the world in this[pg 014]light—and Raphael himself dare not do so: his
          own eyes would show him a new transfiguration.9.Conception of
          the Morality of Custom.—In comparison with the mode
          of life which prevailed among men for thousands of years, we men of
          the present day are living in a very immoral age: the power of
          custom has been weakened to a remarkable degree, and the sense of
          morality is so refined and elevated that we might almost describe
          it as volatilised. That is why we late comers experience such
          difficulty in obtaining a fundamental conception of the origin of
          morality: and even if we do obtain it, our words of explanation
          stick in our throats, so coarse would they sound if we uttered
          them! or to so great an extent would they seem to be a slander upon
          morality! Thus, for example, the fundamental clause: morality is
          nothing else (and, above all, nothing more) than obedience to
          customs, of whatsoever nature they may be. But customs are simply
          the traditional way of acting and valuing. Where there is no
          tradition there is no morality; and the less life is governed by
          tradition, the narrower the circle of morality. The free man is
          immoral, because it is hiswillto depend upon himself and
          not upon tradition: in all the primitive states of humanity“evil”is equivalent to“individual,”“free,”“arbitrary,”“unaccustomed,”“unforeseen,”“incalculable.”In such primitive conditions,
          always measured by this standard, any action performed—notbecause tradition commands[pg 015]it, but for other reasons (e.g.on
          account of its individual utility), even for the same reasons as
          had been formerly established by custom—is termed immoral, and is
          felt to be so even by the very man who performs it, for it has not
          been done out of obedience to the tradition.What is
          tradition? A higher authority, which is obeyed, not because it
          commands what is useful to us, but merely because it commands. And
          in what way can this feeling for tradition be distinguished from a
          general feeling of fear? It is the fear of a higher intelligence
          which commands, the fear of an incomprehensible power, of something
          that is more than personal—there issuperstitionin this fear. In
          primitive times the domain of morality included education and
          hygienics, marriage, medicine, agriculture, war, speech and
          silence, the relationship between man and man, and between man and
          the gods—morality required that a man should observe her
          prescriptions without thinking ofhimselfas individual. Everything, therefore, was originally custom, and
          whoever wished to raise himself above it, had first of all to make
          himself a kind of lawgiver and medicine-man, a sort of demi-god—in
          other words, he had to create customs, a dangerous and fearful
          thing to do!—Who is the most moral man? On the one hand, he who
          most frequently obeys the law:e.g.he
          who, like the Brahmins, carries a consciousness of the law about
          with him wherever he may go, and introduces it into the smallest
          divisions of time, continually exercising his mind in finding
          opportunities for obeying the law. On the other[pg 016]hand, he who obeys the law in the most
          difficult cases. The most moral man is he who makes the greatestsacrificesto morality; but what
          are the greatest sacrifices? In answering this question several
          different kinds of morality will be developed: but the distinction
          between the morality of themost frequent obedienceand the
          morality of themost difficult obedienceis of the
          greatest importance. Let us not be deceived as to the motives of
          that moral law which requires, as an indication of morality,
          obedience to custom in the most difficult cases! Self-conquest is
          required, not by reason of its useful consequences for the
          individual; but that custom and tradition may appear to be
          dominant, in spite of all individual counter desires and
          advantages. The individual shall sacrifice himself—so demands the
          morality of custom.On the other
          hand, those moralists who, like the followers of Socrates,
          recommend self-control and sobriety to theindividualas his greatest
          possible advantage and the key to his greatest personal happiness,
          areexceptions—and if we ourselves do
          not think so, this is simply due to our having been brought up
          under their influence. They all take a new path, and thereby bring
          down upon themselves the utmost disapproval of all the
          representatives of the morality of custom. They sever their
          connection with the community, as immoralists, and are, in the
          fullest sense of the word, evil ones. In the same way, every
          Christian who“sought, above all things,
          hisownsalvation,”must have
          seemed evil to a virtuous Roman of the old school. Wherever a
          community exists, and consequently also a[pg 017]morality of custom, the feeling prevails that
          any punishment for the violation of a custom is inflicted, above
          all, on the community: this punishment is a supernatural
          punishment, the manifestations and limits of which are so difficult
          to understand, and are investigated with such superstitious fear.
          The community can compel any one member of it to make good, either
          to an individual or to the community itself, any ill consequences
          which may have followed upon such a member's action. It can also
          call down a sort of vengeance upon the head of the individual by
          endeavouring to show that, as the result of his action, a storm of
          divine anger has burst over the community,—but, above all, it
          regards the guilt of the individual more particularly asits ownguilt, and bears the punishment of the isolated individual as its
          own punishment—“Morals,”they bewail
          in their innermost heart,“morals have
          grown lax, if such deeds as these are possible.”And every
          individual action, every individual mode of thinking, causes dread.
          It is impossible to determine how much the more select, rare, and
          original minds must have suffered in the course of time by being
          considered as evil and dangerous,yea, because they
          even looked upon themselves as such. Under the
          dominating influence of the morality of custom, originality of
          every kind came to acquire a bad conscience; and even now the sky
          of the best minds seems to be more overcast by this thought than it
          need be.10.Counter-motion
          between the Sense of Morality and the Sense of
          Causality.—As[pg 018]the sense of causality increases, so does the
          extent of the domain of morality decrease: for every time one has
          been able to grasp the necessary effects, and to conceive them as
          distinct from all incidentals and chance possibilities (post hoc), one has, at the same
          time, destroyed an enormous number ofimaginary
          causalities, which had hitherto been believed in as the
          basis of morals—the real world is much smaller than the world of
          our imagination—and each time also one casts away a certain amount
          of one's anxiousness and coercion, and some of our reverence for
          the authority of custom is lost: morality in general undergoes a
          diminution. He who, on the other hand, wishes to increase it must
          know how to prevent results from becoming controllable.11.Morals and
          Medicines of the People.—Every one is continuously
          occupied in bringing more or less influence to bear upon the morals
          which prevail in a community: most of the people bring forward
          example after example to show thealleged
          relationship between cause and effect, guilt and
          punishment, thus upholding it as well founded and adding to the
          belief in it. A few make new observations upon the actions and
          their consequences, drawing conclusions therefrom and laying down
          laws; a smaller number raise objections and allow belief in these
          things to become weakened.—But they are all alike in the crude andunscientificmanner in which they
          set about their work: if it is a question of objections to a law,
          or examples or[pg
          019]observations of it, or of its proof, confirmation, expression or
          refutation, we always find the material and method entirely
          valueless, as valueless as the material and form of all popular
          medicine. Popular medicines and popular morals are closely related,
          and should not be considered and valued, as is still customary, in
          so different a way: both are most dangerous and make-believe
          sciences.12.Consequence as
          Adjuvant Cause.—Formerly the consequences of an
          action were considered, not as the result of that action, but a
          voluntary adjuvant—i.e.on the part of God. Can a
          greater confusion be imagined? Entirely different practices and
          means have to be brought into use for actions and effects!13.Towards the New
          Education of Mankind.—Help us, all ye who are
          well-disposed and willing to assist, lend your aid in the endeavour
          to do away with that conception of punishment which has swept over
          the whole world! No weed more harmful than this! It is not only to
          the consequences of our actions that this conception has been
          applied—and how horrible and senseless it is to confuse cause and
          effect with cause and punishment!—but worse has followed: the pure
          accidentality of events has been robbed of its innocence by this
          execrable manner of interpreting conception of punishment. Yea,
          they have even pushed their folly to such extremes[pg 020]that they would have us look upon
          existence itself as a punishment—from which it would appear that
          the education of mankind had hitherto been confided to cranky
          gaolers and hangmen.14.The
          Signification of Madness in the History of
          Morality.—If, despite that formidable pressure of the“morality of custom,”under which
          all human communities lived—thousands of years before our own era,
          and during our own era up to the present day (we ourselves are
          dwelling in the small world of exceptions, and, as it were, in an
          evil zone):—if, I say, in spite of all this, new and divergent
          ideas, valuations, and impulses have made their appearance time
          after time, this state of things has been brought about only with
          the assistance of a dreadful associate: it was insanity almost
          everywhere that paved the way for the new thought and cast off the
          spell of an old custom and superstition. Do ye understand why this
          had to be done through insanity? by something which is in both
          voice and appearance as horrifying and incalculable as the demoniac
          whims of wind and sea, and consequently calling for like dread and
          respect? by something bearing upon it the signs of entire lack of
          consciousness as clearly as the convulsions and foam of the
          epileptic, which appeared to typify the insane person as the mask
          and speaking-trumpet of some divine being? by something that
          inspired even the bearer of the new thought with awe and fear of
          himself, and that, suppressing all remorse, drove[pg 021]him on to become its prophet and
          martyr?—Well, in our own time, we continually hear the statement
          reiterated that genius is tinctured with madness instead of good
          sense. Men of earlier ages were far more inclined to believe that,
          wherever traces of insanity showed themselves, a certain proportion
          of genius and wisdom was likewise present—something“divine,”as they whispered to one another. More
          than this, they expressed their opinions on the point with
          sufficient emphasis.“All the greatest
          benefits of Greece have sprung from madness,”said Plato,
          setting on record the opinion of the entire ancient world. Let us
          take a step further: all those superior men, who felt themselves
          irresistibly urged on to throw off the yoke of some morality or
          other, had no other resource—if they were not really mad—than
          to feign madness, or actually to become insane. And this holds good
          for innovators in every department of life, and not only in
          religion and politics. Even the reformer of the poetic metre was
          forced to justify himself by means of madness. (Thus even down to
          gentler ages madness remained a kind of convention in poets, of
          which Solon, for instance, took advantage when urging the Athenians
          to reconquer Salamis.)—“How can one make
          one's self mad when one is not mad and dare not feign to be
          so?”Almost all the eminent men of antiquity have given
          themselves up to this dreadful mode of reasoning: a secret doctrine
          of artifices and dietetic jugglery grew up around this subject and
          was handed down from generation to generation, together with the
          feeling of the innocence, even sanctity, of such plans and
          meditations. The means of becoming[pg 022]a medicine-man among the Indians, a saint
          among Christians of the Middle Ages, an angecok among Greenlanders,
          a Pagee among Brazilians, are the same in essence: senseless
          fasting, continual abstention from sexual intercourse, isolation in
          a wilderness, ascending a mountain or a pillar,“sitting on an aged willow that looks out upon a
          lake,”and thinking of absolutely nothing but what may give
          rise to ecstasy or mental derangements.Who would dare
          to glance at the desert of the bitterest and most superfluous
          agonies of spirit, in which probably the most productive men of all
          ages have pined away? Who could listen to the sighs of those lonely
          and troubled minds:“O ye heavenly powers,
          grant me madness! Madness, that I at length may believe in myself!
          Vouchsafe delirium and convulsions, sudden flashes of light and
          periods of darkness; frighten me with such shivering and
          feverishness as no mortal ever experienced before, with clanging
          noises and haunting spectres; let me growl and whine and creep
          about like a beast, if only I can come to believe in myself! I am
          devoured by doubt. I have slain the law, and I now dread the law as
          a living person dreads a corpse. If I am notabovethe law, I am the most abandoned of wretches. Whence cometh this
          new spirit that dwelleth within me but from you? Prove to me, then,
          that I am one of you—nothing but madness will prove it to
          me.”And only too often does such a fervour attain its
          object: at the very time when Christianity was giving the greatest
          proof of its fertility in the production of saints and martyrs,
          believing that it was thus proving itself, Jerusalem[pg 023]contained large lunatic asylums for
          shipwrecked saints, for those whose last spark of good sense had
          been quenched by the floods of insanity.15.The most
          Ancient Means of Solace.—First stage: In every
          misfortune or discomfort man sees something for which he must make
          somebody else suffer, no matter who—in this way he finds out the
          amount of power still remaining to him; and this consoles him.
          Second stage: In every misfortune or discomfort, man sees a
          punishment,i.e.an expiation of guilt and
          the means by which he may get rid of the malicious enchantment of a
          real or apparent wrong. When he perceives theadvantagewhich misfortune bring
          with it, he believes he need no longer make another person suffer
          for it—he gives up this kind of satisfaction, because he now has
          another.16.First Principle
          of Civilisation.—Among savage tribes there is a
          certain category of customs which appear to aim at nothing but
          custom. They therefore lay down strict, and, on the whole,
          superfluous regulations (e.g.the rules of the
          Kamchadales, which forbid snow to be scraped off the boots with a
          knife, coal to be stuck on the point of a knife, or a piece of iron
          to be put into the fire—and death to be the portion of every one
          who shall act contrariwise!) Yet these laws serve to keep people
          continually reminded of the custom, and[pg 024]the imperative necessity on their parts to
          conform to it: and all this in support of the great principle which
          stands at the beginning of all civilisation: any custom is better
          than none.17.Goodness and
          Malignity.—At first men imposed their own
          personalities on Nature: everywhere they saw themselves and their
          like,i.e.their own evil and
          capricious temperaments, hidden, as it were, behind clouds,
          thunder-storms, wild beasts, trees, and plants: it was then that
          they declared Nature was evil. Afterwards there came a time, that
          of Rousseau, when they sought to distinguish themselves from
          Nature: they were so tired of each other that they wished to have
          separate little hiding-places where man and his misery could not
          penetrate: then they invented“nature is
          good.”18.The Morality of
          Voluntary Suffering.—What is the highest enjoyment
          for men living in a state of war in a small community, the
          existence of which is continually threatened, and the morality of
          which is the strictest possible?i.e.for souls which are vigorous, vindictive, malicious, full of
          suspicion, ready to face the direst events, hardened by privation
          and morality? The enjoyment of cruelty: just as, in such souls and
          in such circumstances, it would be regarded as a virtue to be
          ingenious and insatiable in cruelty. Such a community would[pg 025]find its delight in
          performing cruel deeds, casting aside, for once, the gloom of
          constant anxiety and precaution. Cruelty is one of the most ancient
          enjoyments at their festivities. As a consequence it is believed
          that the gods likewise are pleased by the sight of cruelty and
          rejoice at it—and in this way the belief is spread thatvoluntary
          suffering, self-chosen martyrdom, has a high
          signification and value of its own. In the community custom
          gradually brings about a practice in conformity with this belief:
          henceforward people become more suspicious of all exuberant
          well-being, and more confident as they find themselves in a state
          of great pain; they think that the gods may be unfavourable to them
          on account of happiness, and favourable on account of pain—not
          compassionate! For compassion is looked upon with contempt, and
          unworthy of a strong and awe-inspiring soul—but agreeable to them,
          because the sight of human suffering put these gods into good
          humour and makes them feel powerful, and a cruel mind revels in the
          sensation of power. It was thus that the“most moral man”of the community was considered
          as such by virtue of his frequent suffering, privation, laborious
          existence, and cruel mortification—not, to repeat it again and
          again, as a means of discipline or self-control or a desire for
          individual happiness—but a a virtue which renders the evil gods
          well-disposed towards the community, a virtue which continually
          wafts up to them the odour of an expiatory sacrifice. All those
          intellectual leaders of the nations who reached the point of being
          able to stir up the sluggish though[pg 026]prolific mire of their customs had to possess
          this factor of voluntary martyrdom as well as insanity in order to
          obtain belief—especially, and above all, as is always the case,
          belief in themselves! The more their minds followed new paths, and
          were consequently tormented by pricks of conscience, the more
          cruelly they battled against their own flesh, their own desires,
          and their own health—as if they were offering the gods a
          compensation in pleasure, lest these gods should wax wroth at the
          neglect of ancient customs and the setting up of new aims.Let no one be
          too hasty in thinking that we have now entirely freed ourselves
          from such a logic of feeling! Let the most heroic souls among us
          question themselves on this very point. The least step forward in
          the domain of free thought and individual life has been achieved in
          all ages to the accompaniment of physical and intellectual
          tortures: and not only the mere step forward, no! but every form of
          movement and change has rendered necessary innumerable martyrs,
          throughout the entire course of thousands of years which sought
          their paths and laid down their foundation-stones, years, however,
          which we do not think of when we speak about“world-history,”that ridiculously small
          division of mankind's existence. And even in this so-called
          world-history, which in the main is merely a great deal of noise
          about the latest novelties, there is no more important theme than
          the old, old tragedy of the martyrswho tried to move
          the mire. Nothing has been more dearly bought than the
          minute portion of human reason and feeling of liberty upon which we
          now pride ourselves. But[pg
          027]it is this very pride which makes it almost impossible for us
          to-day to be conscious of that enormous lapse of time, preceding
          the period of“world-history”when“morality of custom”held the field,
          and to consider this lapse of time asthe real and
          decisive epoch that established the character of
          mankind: an epoch when suffering was considered as a
          virtue, cruelty as a virtue, hypocrisy as a virtue, revenge as a
          virtue, and the denial of the reason as a virtue, whereas, on the
          other hand, well-being was regarded as a danger, longing for
          knowledge as a danger, peace as a danger, compassion as a danger:
          an epoch when being pitied was looked upon as an insult, work as an
          insult, madness as a divine attribute, and every kind of change as
          immoral and pregnant with ruin! You imagine that all this has
          changed, and that humanity must likewise have changed its
          character? Oh, ye poor psychologists, learn to know yourselves
          better!19.Morality and
          Stupefaction.—Custom represents the experiences of
          men of earlier times in regard to what they considered as useful
          and harmful; but thefeeling of custom(morality) does
          not relate to these feelings as such, but to the age, the sanctity,
          and the unquestioned authority of the custom. Hence this feeling
          hinders our acquiring new experiences and amending morals:i.e.morality is opposed to the
          formation of new and better morals: it stupefies.[pg 028]20.Free-doers and
          Free-thinkers.—Compared with free-thinkers,
          free-doers are at a disadvantage, because it is evident that men
          suffer more from the consequences of actions than of thoughts. If
          we remember, however, that both seek their own satisfaction, and
          that free-thinkers have already found their satisfaction in
          reflection upon and utterance of forbidden things, there is no
          difference in the motives; but in respect of the consequences the
          issue will be decided against the free-thinker, provided that it be
          not judged from the most superficial and vulgar external
          appearance,i.e.not as every one would
          judge it. We must make up for a good deal of the calumny with which
          men have covered all those who have, by their actions, broken away
          from the authority of some custom—they are generally called
          criminals. Every one who has hitherto overthrown a law of
          established morality has always at first been considered as awicked
          man: but when it was afterwards found impossible to
          re-establish the law, and people gradually became accustomed to the
          change, the epithet was changed by slow degrees. History deals
          almost exclusively with thesewicked men, who later on came to
          be recognised asgood men.21.“Fulfilment of the
          Law.”—In cases where the observance of a moral
          precept has led to different consequence from that expected and[pg 029]promised, and does
          not bestow upon the moral man the happiness he had hoped for, but
          leads rather to misfortune and misery, the conscientious and timid
          man has always his excuse ready:“Something
          was lacking in the propercarrying outof the law.”If the worst comes to the worst, a deeply-suffering and
          down-trodden humanity will even decree:“It
          is impossible to carry out the precept faithfully: we are too weak
          and sinful, and, in the depths of our soul, incapable of morality:
          consequently we have no claim to happiness and success. Moral
          precepts and promises have been given for better beings than
          ourselves.”22.Works and
          Faith.—Protestant teachers are still spreading the
          fundamental error that faith only is of consequence, and that works
          must follow naturally upon faith. This doctrine is certainly not
          true, but it is so seductive in appearance that it has succeeded in
          fascinating quite other intellects than that of Luther
          (e.g.the minds of Socrates and
          Plato): though the plain evidence and experience of our daily life
          prove the contrary. The most assured knowledge and faith cannot
          give us either the strength or the dexterity required for action,
          or the practice in that subtle and complicated mechanism which is a
          prerequisite for anything to be changed from an idea into action.
          Then, I say, let us first and foremost have works! and this means
          practice! practice! practice! The necessary faith will come
          later—be certain of that![pg 030]23.In what Respect
          we are most Subtle.—By the fact that, for thousands
          of years,things(nature, tools, property of
          all kinds) were thought to be alive and to possess souls, and able
          to hinder and interfere with the designs of man, the feeling of
          impotence among men has become greater and more frequent than it
          need have been: for one had to secure one's things like men and
          beasts, by means of force, compulsion, flattery, treaties,
          sacrifices—and it is here that we may find the origin of the
          greater number of superstitious customs,i.e.of
          an important,perhaps paramount, and
          nevertheless wasted and useless division of mankind's activity!—But
          since the feeling of impotence and fear was so strong, and for such
          a length of time in a state of constant stimulation, the feeling ofpowerin man has been developed in
          so subtle a manner that, in this respect, he can compare favourably
          with the most delicately-adjusted balance. This feeling has become
          his strongest propensity: and the means he discovered for creating
          it form almost the entire history of culture.24.The Proof of a
          Precept.—The worth or worthlessness of a recipe—that
          for baking bread, for example—is proved, generally speaking, by the
          result expected coming to pass or not, provided, of course, that
          the directions given have been carefully[pg 031]followed. The case is different, however,
          when we come to deal with moral precepts, for here the results
          cannot be ascertained, interpreted, and divined. These precepts,
          indeed, are based upon hypotheses of but little scientific value,
          the proof or refutation of which by means of results is
          impossible:—but in former ages, when all science was crude and
          primitive, and when a matter wastaken for
          grantedon the smallest evidence, then the worth or
          worthlessness of a moral recipe was determined as we now determine
          any other precept: by reference to the results. If the natives of
          Alaska believe in a command which says:“Thou shalt not throw a bone into the fire or give it
          to a dog,”this will be proved by the warning:“If thou dost thou wilt have no luck when
          hunting.”Yet, in one sense or another, it almost invariably
          happens that one has“no luck when
          hunting.”It is no easy matter torefutethe worth of the precept in this way, the more so as it is the
          community, and not the individual, which is regarded as the bearer
          of the punishment; and, again, some occurrence is almost certain to
          happen which seems to prove the rule.