25.Customs and
          Beauty.—In justice to custom it must not be
          overlooked that, in the case of all those who conform to it
          whole-heartedly from the very start, the organs of attack and
          defence, both physical and intellectual, begin to waste away;i.e.these individuals gradually
          become more beautiful! For it is the exercise of these organs and
          their corresponding[pg
          032]feelings that brings about ugliness and helps to preserve it. It is
          for this reason that the old baboon is uglier than the young one,
          and that the young female baboon most closely resembles man, and is
          hence the most handsome.—Let us draw from this our own conclusions
          as to the origin of female beauty!26.Animals and
          Morals.—The rules insisted upon in polite society,
          such, for example, as the avoidance of everything ridiculous,
          fantastic, presumptuous; the suppression of one's virtues just as
          much as of one's most violent desires, the instant bringing of
          one's self down to the general level, submitting one's self to
          etiquette and self-depreciation: all this, generally speaking, is
          to be found, as a social morality, even in the lowest scale of the
          animal world—and it is only in this low scale that we see the
          innermost plan of all these amiable precautionary regulations: one
          wishes to escape from one's pursuers and to be aided in the search
          for plunder. Hence animals learn to control and to disguise
          themselves to such an extent that some of them can even adapt the
          colour of their bodies to that of their surroundings (by means of
          what is known as the“chromatic
          function”). Others can simulate death, or adopt the forms
          and colours of other animals, or of sand, leaves, moss, or fungi
          (known to English naturalists as“mimicry”).It is in this
          way that an individual conceals himself behind the universality of
          the generic term[pg
          033]“man”or“society,”or adapts and attaches himself to
          princes, castes, political parties, current opinions of the time,
          or his surroundings: and we may easily find the animal equivalent
          of all those subtle means of making ourselves happy, thankful,
          powerful, and fascinating. Even that sense of truth, which is at
          bottom merely the sense of security, is possessed by man in common
          with the animals: we do not wish to be deceived by others or by
          ourselves; we hear with some suspicion the promptings of our own
          passions, we control ourselves and remain on the watch against
          ourselves. Now, the animal does all this as well as man; and in the
          animal likewise self-control originates in the sense of reality
          (prudence). In the same way, the animal observes the effects it
          exercises on the imagination of other beasts: it thus learns to
          view itself from their position, to consider itself“objectively”; it has its own degree of
          self-knowledge. The animal judges the movements of its friends and
          foes, it learns their peculiarities by heart and acts accordingly:
          it gives up, once and for all, the struggle against individual
          animals of certain species, and it likewise recognises, in the
          approach of certain varieties, whether their intentions are
          agreeable and peaceful. The beginnings of justice, like those of
          wisdom—in short, everything which we know as theSocratic
          virtues—are of ananimalnature: a consequence of
          those instincts which teach us to search for food and to avoid our
          enemies. If we remember that the higher man has merely raised and
          refined himself in thequalityof his food and in the
          conception of what is contrary to his nature, it[pg 034]may not be going too far to describe
          the entire moral phenomenon as of an animal origin.27.The Value of
          the Belief in Superhuman Passions.—The institution of
          marriage stubbornly upholds the belief that love, although a
          passion, is nevertheless capable of duration as such, yea, that
          lasting, lifelong love may be taken as a general rule. By means of
          the tenacity of a noble belief, in spite of such frequent and
          almost customary refutations—thereby becoming apia
          fraus—marriage has elevated love to a higher rank.
          Every institution which has conceded to a passion thebelief in the
          duration of the latter, and responsibility for this
          duration, in spite of the nature of the passion itself, has raised
          the passion to a higher level: and he who is thenceforth seized
          with such a passion does not, as formerly, think himself lowered in
          the estimation of others or brought into danger on that account,
          but on the contrary believes himself to be raised, both in the
          opinion of himself and of his equals. Let us recall institutions
          and customs which, out of the fiery devotion of a moment, have
          created eternal fidelity; out of the pleasure of anger, eternal
          vengeance; out of despair, eternal mourning; out of a single hasty
          word, eternal obligation. A great deal of hypocrisy and falsehood
          came into the world as the result of such transformations; but each
          time, too, at the cost of such disadvantages, a new andsuperhumanconception which
          elevates mankind.[pg 035]28.State of Mind
          as Argument.—Whence arises within us a cheerful
          readiness for action?—such is the question which has greatly
          occupied the attention of men. The most ancient answer, and one
          which we still hear, is: God is the cause; in this way He gives us
          to understand that He approves of our actions. When, in former
          ages, people consulted the oracles, they did so that they might
          return home strengthened by this cheerful readiness; and every one
          answered the doubts which came to him, if alternative actions
          suggested themselves, by saying:“I shall
          do whatever brings about that feeling.”They did not decide,
          in other words, for what was most reasonable, but upon some plan
          the conception of which imbued the soul with courage and hope. A
          cheerful outlook was placed in the scales as an argument and proved
          to be heavier than reasonableness; for the state of mind was
          interpreted in a superstitious manner as the action of a god who
          promises success; and who, by this argument, lets his reason speak
          as the highest reasonableness. Now, let the consequences of such a
          prejudice be considered when shrewd men, thirsting for power,
          availed themselves of it—and still do so!“Bring about the right state of mind!”—in this
          way you can do without all arguments and overcome every
          objection!29.Actors of
          Virtue and Sin.—Among the ancients who became
          celebrated for their virtue[pg 036]there were many, it would seem,who acted to
          themselves, especially the Greeks, who, being actors by
          nature, must have acted quite unconsciously, seeing no reason why
          they should not do so. In addition, every one was striving to outdo
          some one else's virtue with his own, so why should they not have
          made use of every artifice to show off their virtues, especially
          among themselves, if only for the sake of practice! Of what use was
          a virtue which one could not display, and which did not know how to
          display itself!—Christianity put an end to the career of these
          actors of virtue; instead it devised the disgusting ostentation and
          parading of sins: it brought into the world a state ofmendacious
          sinfulness(even at the present day this is considered
          asbon tonamong orthodox
          Christians).30.Refined Cruelty
          as Virtue.—Here we have a morality which is based
          entirely upon our thirst for distinction—do not therefore entertain
          too high an opinion of it! Indeed, we may well ask what kind of an
          impulse it is, and what is its fundamental signification? It is
          sought, by our appearance, to grieve our neighbour, to arouse his
          envy, and to awaken his feelings of impotence and degradation; we
          endeavour to make him taste the bitterness of his fate by dropping
          a little ofourhoney on his tongue, and,
          while conferring this supposed benefit on him, looking sharply and
          triumphantly into his eyes.Behold such a
          man, now become humble, and perfect in his humility—and seek those
          for whom, through his humility, he has for a long time been[pg 037]preparing a torture;
          for you are sure to find them! Here is another man who shows mercy
          towards animals, and is admired for doing so—but there are certain
          people on whom he wishes to vent his cruelty by this very means.
          Look at that great artist: the pleasure he enjoyed beforehand in
          conceiving the envy of the rivals he had outstripped, refused to
          let his powers lie dormant until he became a great man—how many
          bitter moments in the souls of other men has he asked for as
          payment for his own greatness! The nun's chastity: with what
          threatening eyes she looks into the faces of other women who live
          differently from her! what a vindictive joy shines in those eyes!
          The theme is short, and its variations, though they might well be
          innumerable, could not easily become tiresome—for it is still too
          paradoxical a novelty, and almost a painful one, to affirm that the
          morality of distinction is nothing, at bottom, but joy in refined
          cruelty. When I say“at bottom,”I
          mean here, every time in the first generation. For, when the habit
          of some distinguished action becomeshereditary, its root, so to speak,
          is not transmitted, but only its fruits (for only feelings, and not
          thoughts, can become hereditary): and, if we presuppose that this
          root is not reintroduced by education, in the second generation the
          joy in the cruelty is no longer felt: but only pleasure in the
          habit as such.Thisjoy, however, is the first
          degree of the“good.”31.Pride in
          Spirit.—The pride of man, which strives to oppose the
          theory of our own descent[pg
          038]from animals and establishes a wide gulf between nature and man
          himself—this pride is founded upon a prejudice as to what the mind
          is; and this prejudice is relatively recent. In the long
          prehistorical period of humanity it was supposed that the mind was
          everywhere, and men did not look upon it as a particular
          characteristic of their own. Since, on the contrary, everything
          spiritual (including all impulses, maliciousness, and inclinations)
          was regarded as common property, and consequently accessible to
          everybody, primitive mankind was not ashamed of being descended
          from animals or trees (the noble races thought themselves honoured
          by such legends), and saw in the spiritual that which unites us
          with nature, and not that which severs us from her. Thus man was
          brought up in modesty—and this likewise was the result of a
          prejudice.32.The
          Brake.—To suffer morally, and then to learn
          afterwards that this kind of suffering was founded upon an error,
          shocks us. For there is a unique consolation in acknowledging, by
          our suffering, a“deeper world of
          truth”than any other world, and we would much rather suffer
          and feel ourselves above reality by doing so (through the feeling
          that, in this way, we approach nearer to that“deeper world of truth”), than live without
          suffering and hence without this feeling of the sublime. Thus it is
          pride, and the habitual fashion of satisfying it, which opposes
          this new interpretation of morality. What power, then, must we
          bring into operation to[pg
          039]get rid of this brake? Greater pride? A new pride?33.The Contempt of
          Causes, Consequences, and Reality.—Those unfortunate
          occurrences which take place at times in the community, such as
          sudden storms, bad harvests, or plagues, lead members of the
          community to suspect that offences against custom have been
          committed, or that new customs must be invented to appease a new
          demoniac power and caprice. Suspicion and reasoning of this kind,
          however, evade an inquiry into the real and natural causes, and
          take the demoniac cause for granted. This is one source of the
          hereditary perversion of the human intellect; and the other one
          follows in its train, for, proceeding on the same principle, people
          paid much less attention to the real and natural consequences of an
          action than to the supernatural consequences (the so-called
          punishments and mercies of the Divinity). It is commanded, for
          instance, that certain baths are to be taken at certain times: and
          the baths are taken, not for the sake of cleanliness, but because
          the command has been made. We are not taught to avoid the real
          consequences of dirt, but merely the supposed displeasure of the
          gods because a bath has been omitted. Under the pressure of
          superstitious fear, people began to suspect that these ablutions
          were of much greater importance than they seemed; they ascribed
          inner and supplementary meanings to them, gradually lost their
          sense of and pleasure in reality, and finally reality is considered
          as valuable[pg
          040]only to
          the extent that it is a symbol.Hence a man who is
          under the influence of the morality of custom comes to despise
          causes first of all, secondly consequences, and thirdly reality,
          and weaves all his higher feelings (reverence, sublimity, pride,
          gratitude, love)into an imaginary world: the
          so-called higher world. And even to-day we can see the consequences
          of this: wherever, and in whatever fashion, man's feelings are
          raised, that imaginary world is in evidence. It is sad to have to
          say it; but for the time beingall higher
          sentimentsmust be looked upon with suspicion by the
          man of science, to so great an extent are they intermingled with
          illusion and extravagance. Not that they need necessarily be
          suspectedper seand for
          ever; but there is no doubt that, of all the gradualpurificationswhich await
          humanity, the purification of the higher feelings will be one of
          the slowest.34.Moral Feelings
          and Conceptions.—It is clear that moral feelings are
          transmitted in such a way that children perceive in adults violent
          predilections and aversions for certain actions, and then, like
          born apes, imitate such likes and dislikes. Later on in life, when
          they are thoroughly permeated by these acquired and well-practised
          feelings, they think it a matter of propriety and decorum to
          provide a kind of justification for these predilections and
          aversions. These“justifications,”however, are in no way connected with the origin or the degree of
          the feeling: people simply[pg 041]accommodate themselves to the rule that, as
          rational beings, they must give reasons for their pros and cons,
          reasons which must be assignable and acceptable into the bargain.
          Up to this extent the history of the moral feelings is entirely
          different from the history of moral conceptions. The
          first-mentioned are powerfulbeforethe action, and the latter
          especially after it, in view of the necessity for making one's self
          clear in regard to them.35.Feelings and
          their Descent from Judgments.—“Trust in your feelings!”But feelings comprise
          nothing final, original; feelings are based upon the judgments and
          valuations which are transmitted to us in the shape of feelings
          (inclinations, dislikes). The inspiration which springs from a
          feeling is the grandchild of a judgment—often an erroneous
          judgment!—and certainly not one's own judgment! Trusting in our
          feelings simply means obeying our grandfather and grandmother more
          than the gods withinourselves: our reason and
          experience.36.A Foolish
          Piety, withArrière-pensées.—What!
          the inventors of ancient civilisations, the first makers of tools
          and tape lines, the first builders of vehicles, ships, and houses,
          the first observers of the laws of the heavens and the
          multiplication tables—is it contended that they were entirely
          different from the inventors and observers of our own time,[pg 042]and superior to
          them? And that the first slow steps forward were of a value which
          has not been equalled by the discoveries we have made with all our
          travels and circumnavigations of the earth? It is the voice of
          prejudice that speaks thus, and argues in this way to depreciate
          the importance of the modern mind. And yet it is plain to be seen
          that, in former times, hazard was the greatest of all discoverers
          and observers and the benevolent prompter of these ingenious
          ancients, and that, in the case of the most insignificant invention
          now made, a greater intellect, discipline, and scientific
          imagination are required than formerly existed throughout long
          ages.37.Wrong
          Conclusions From Usefulness.—When we have
          demonstrated the highest utility of a thing, we have nevertheless
          made no progress towards an explanation of its origin; in other
          words, we can never explain, by mere utility, the necessity of
          existence. But precisely the contrary opinion has been maintained
          up to the present time, even in the domain of the most exact
          science. In astronomy, for example, have we not heard it stated
          that the (supposed) usefulness of the system of
          satellites—(replacing the light which is diminished in intensity by
          the greater distance of the sun, in order that the inhabitants of
          the various celestial bodies should not want for light)—was the
          final object of this system and explained its origin? Which may
          remind us of the conclusions of Christopher Columbus The earth has
          been[pg 043]created for man,
          ergo, if there are countries, they must be inhabited.“Is it probable that the sun would throw his rays on
          nothing, and that the nocturnal vigils of the stars should be
          wasted upon untravelled seas and unpeopled countries?”38.Impulses
          Transformed by Moral Judgments.—The same impulse,
          under the impression of the blame cast upon it by custom, develops
          into the painful feeling of cowardice, or else the pleasurable
          feeling ofhumility, in case a morality, like
          that of Christianity, has taken it to its heart and called itgood. In other words, this
          instinct will fall under the influence of either a good conscience
          or a bad one! In itself,like every instinct, it does not
          possess either this or indeed any other moral character and name,
          or even a definite accompanying feeling of pleasure or displeasure;
          it does not acquire all these qualities as its second nature until
          it comes into contact with impulses which have already been
          baptized as good and evil, or has been recognised as the attribute
          of beings already weighed and valued by the people from a moral
          point of view. Thus the ancient conception of envy differed
          entirely from ours. Hesiod reckons it among the qualities of thegood, benevolent Eris, and it was
          not considered as offensive to attribute some kind of envy even to
          the gods. This is easy to understand in a state of things inspired
          mainly by emulation, but emulation was looked upon as good, and
          valued accordingly.[pg
          044]The Greeks were
          likewise different from us in the value they set upon hope: they
          conceived it as blind and deceitful. Hesiod in one of his poems has
          made a strong reference to it—a reference so strong, indeed, that
          no modern commentator has quite understood it; for it runs contrary
          to the modern mind, which has learnt from Christianity to look upon
          hope as a virtue. Among the Greeks, on the other hand, the portal
          leading to a knowledge of the future seemed only partly closed,
          and, in innumerable instances, it was impressed upon them as a
          religious obligation to inquire into the future, in those cases
          where we remain satisfied with hope. It thus came about that the
          Greeks, thanks to their oracles and seers, held hope in small
          esteem, and even lowered it to the level of an evil and a
          danger.The Jews, again,
          took a different view of anger from that held by us, and sanctified
          it: hence they have placed the sombre majesty of the wrathful man
          at an elevation so high that a European cannot conceive it. They
          moulded their wrathful and holy Jehovah after the images of their
          wrathful and holy prophets. Compared with them, all the Europeans
          who have exhibited the greatest wrath are, so to speak, only
          second-hand creatures.39.The Prejudice
          concerning“Pure Spirit.”—Wherever the
          doctrine ofpure spiritualityhas prevailed,
          its excesses have resulted in the destruction of the tone of the
          nerves: it taught that the[pg 045]body should be despised, neglected, or
          tormented, and that, on account of his impulses, man himself should
          be tortured and regarded with contempt. It gave rise to gloomy,
          strained, and downcast souls—who, besides, thought they knew the
          reason of their misery and how it might possibly be relieved!“Itmustbe in the body! For it stillthrivestoo well!”—such was
          their conclusion, whilst the fact was that the body, through its
          agonies, protested time after time against this never-ending
          mockery. Finally, a universal and chronic hyper-nervousness seized
          upon those virtuous representatives of the pure spirit: they
          learned to recognise joy only in the shape of ecstasies and other
          preliminary symptoms of insanity—and their system reached its
          climax when it came to look upon ecstasy as the highest aim of
          life, and as the standard by which all earthly things must becondemned.40.Meditations
          upon Observances.—Numerous moral precepts, carelessly
          drawn from a single event, quickly became incomprehensible; it was
          as difficult a matter to deduce their intentions with any degree of
          certainty as it was to recognise the punishment which was to follow
          the breaking of the rule. Doubts were even held regarding the order
          of the ceremonies; but, while people guessed at random about such
          matters, the object of their investigations increased in
          importance, it was precisely the greatest absurdity[pg 046]of an observance that developed into a
          holy of holies. Let us not think too little of the energy wasted by
          man in this regard throughout thousands of years, and least of all
          of the effects of suchmeditations upon observances! Here
          we find ourselves on the wide training-ground of the intellect—not
          only do religions develop and continue to increase within its
          boundaries: but here also is the venerable, though dreadful,
          primeval world of science; here grow up the poet, the thinker, the
          physician, the lawgiver. The dread of the unintelligible, which, in
          an ambiguous fashion, demanded ceremonies from us, gradually
          assumed the charm of the intricate, and where man could not unravel
          he learnt to create.41.To Determine
          the Value of theVita
          Contemplativa.—Let us not forget, as
          men leading a contemplative life, what kind of evil and misfortunes
          have overtaken the men of thevita activaas the result of
          contemplation—in short, what sort of contra-account thevita activahas to offerus, if we exhibit too much
          boastfulness before it with respect to our good deeds. It would
          show us, in the first place, those so-called religious natures, who
          predominate among the lovers of contemplation and consequently
          represent their commonest type. They have at all times acted in
          such a manner as to render life difficult to practical men, and
          tried to make them disgusted with it, if possible: to darken the
          sky, to obliterate the[pg
          047]sun, to cast suspicion upon joy, to depreciate hope, to paralyse
          the active hand—all this they knew how to do, just as, for
          miserable times and feelings, they had their consolations, alms,
          blessings, and benedictions. In the second place, it can show us
          the artists, a species of men leading thevita contemplativa, rarer than
          the religious element, but still often to be met with. As beings,
          these people are usually intolerable, capricious, jealous, violent,
          quarrelsome: this, however, must be deduced from the joyous and
          exalting effects of their works.Thirdly, we have
          the philosophers, men who unite religious and artistic qualities,
          combined, however, with a third element, namely, dialectics and the
          love of controversy. They are the authors of evil in the same sense
          as the religious men and artists, in addition to which they have
          wearied many of their fellow-men with their passion for dialectics,
          though their number has always been very small. Fourthly, the
          thinkers and scientific workers. They but rarely strove after
          effects, and contented themselves with silently sticking to their
          own groove. Thus they brought about little envy and discomfort, and
          often, as objects of mockery and derision, they served, without
          wishing to do so, to make life easier for the men of thevita activa. Lastly, science
          ended by becoming of much advantage to all; and if,on account of this
          utility, many of the men who were destined for thevita activaare now slowly
          making their way along the road to science in the sweat of their
          brow, and not without brain-racking and maledictions, this is not
          the[pg 048]fault of the crowd
          of thinkers and scientific workers: it is“self-wrought pain.”342.Origin of
          theVita
          Contemplativa.—During barbarous ages,
          when pessimistic judgments held sway over men and the world, the
          individual, in the consciousness of his full power, always
          endeavoured to act in conformity with such judgments, that is to
          say, he put his ideas into action by means of hunting, robbery,
          surprise attacks, brutality, and murder: including the weaker forms
          of such acts, as far as they are tolerated within the community.
          When his strength declines, however, and he feels tired, ill,
          melancholy, or satiated—consequently becoming temporarily void of
          wishes or desires—he is a relatively better man, that is to say,
          less dangerous; and his pessimistic ideas will now discharge
          themselves only in words and reflections—upon his companions, for
          example, or his wife, his life, his gods,—his judgments will beevilones. In this frame of mind
          he develops into a thinker and prophet, or he adds to his
          superstitions and invents new observances, or mocks his enemies.
          Whatever he may devise, however, all the productions of his brain
          will necessarily reflect his frame of mind, such as the increase of
          fear and weariness, and the lower value he attributes to action and
          enjoyment. The substance of these productions must correspond to
          the substance of[pg
          049]these poetic, thoughtful, and priestly moods; the evil judgment
          must be supreme.In later years,
          all those who acted continuously as this man did in those special
          circumstances—i.e.those who gave out
          pessimistic judgments, and lived a melancholy life, poor in
          action—were called poets, thinkers, priests, or“medicine-men.”The general body of men would
          have liked to disregard such people, because they were not active
          enough, and to turn them out of the community; but there was a
          certain risk in doing so: these inactive men had found out and were
          following the tracks of superstition and divine power, and no one
          doubted that they had unknown means of power at their disposal.
          This was the value which was set uponthe ancient race of
          contemplative natures—despised as they were in just the
          same degree as they were not dreaded! In such a masked form, in
          such an ambiguous aspect, with an evil heart and often with a
          troubled head, did Contemplation make its first appearance on
          earth: both weak and terrible at the same time, despised in secret,
          and covered in public with every mark of superstitious veneration.
          Here, as always, we must say:pudenda
          origo!43.How many Forces
          must now be united in a Thinker.—To rise superior to
          considerations of the senses, to raise one's self to abstract
          contemplations: this is what was formerly regarded aselevation; but now it is not
          practicable for us to share the same feelings. Luxuriating in the[pg 050]most shadowy images
          of words and things; playing with those invisible, inaudible,
          imperceptible beings, was considered as existence in another andhigherworld, a world that sprang
          from the deep contempt felt for the world which was perceptible to
          the senses, this seductive and wicked world of ours.“Theseabstractano longer mislead us,
          but they may lead us”—with such words men soared aloft. It
          was not thesubstanceof these intellectual
          sports, but the sports themselves, which was looked upon as“the higher thing”in the primeval
          ages of science. Hence we have Plato's admiration for dialectics,
          and his enthusiastic belief in the necessary relationship of
          dialectics to the good man who has risen superior to the
          considerations of his senses. It was not only knowledge that was
          discovered little by little, but also the different means of
          acquiring it, the conditions and operations which precede knowledge
          in man. And it always seemed as if the newly-discovered operation
          or the newly-experienced condition were not a means of acquiring
          knowledge, but was even the substance, goal, and sum-total of
          everything that was worth knowing. What does the thinker
          require?—imagination, inspiration, abstraction, spirituality,
          invention, presentiment, induction, dialectics, deduction,
          criticism, ability to collect materials, an impersonal mode of
          thinking, contemplation, comprehensiveness, and lastly, but not
          least, justice, and love for everything that exists—but each one of
          these means was at one time considered, in the history of thevita contemplativa, as a goal
          and final purpose, and they all secured for[pg 051]their inventors that perfect happiness
          which fills the human soul when its final purpose dawns upon
          it.44.Origin and
          Meaning.—Why does this thought come into my mind
          again and again, always in more and more vivid colours?—that, in
          former times, investigators, in the course of their search for the
          origin of things, always thought that they found something which
          would be of the highest importance for all kinds of action and
          judgment: yea, that they even invariably postulated that the
          salvation of mankind depended uponinsight into the
          origin of things—whereas now, on the other hand, the
          more we examine into origins, the less do they concern our
          interests: on the contrary, all the valuations and interestedness
          which we have placed upon things begin to lose their meaning, the
          more we retrogress where knowledge is concerned and approach the
          things themselves.The origin becomes of less significance in
          proportion as we acquire insight into it; whilst things
          nearest to ourselves, around and within us, gradually begin to
          manifest their wealth of colours, beauties, enigmas, and diversity
          of meaning, of which earlier humanity never dreamed. In former ages
          thinkers used to move furiously about, like wild animals in cages,
          steadily glaring at the bars which hemmed them in, and at times
          springing up against them in a vain endeavour to break through
          them: and happy indeed was he who could look through a gap to the
          outer world and could fancy that[pg 052]he saw something of what lay beyond and afar
          off.45.A Tragic
          Termination to Knowledge.—Of all the means of
          exaltation, human sacrifices have at times done most to elevate
          man. And perhaps the one powerful thought—the idea ofself-sacrificing
          humanity—might be made to prevail over every other
          aspiration, and thus to prove the victor over even the most
          victorious. But to whom should the sacrifice be made? We may
          already swear that, if ever the constellation of such an idea
          appeared on the horizon, the knowledge of truth would remain the
          single but enormous object with which a sacrifice of such a nature
          would be commensurate—because no sacrifice is too great for it. In
          the meantime the problem has never been expounded as to how far
          humanity, considered as a whole, could take steps to encourage the
          advancement of knowledge; and even less as to what thirst for
          knowledge could impel humanity to the point of sacrificing itself
          with the light of an anticipated wisdom in its eyes. When, perhaps,
          with a view to the advancement of knowledge, we are able to enter
          into communication with the inhabitants of other stars, and when,
          during thousands of years, wisdom will have been carried from star
          to star, the enthusiasm of knowledge may rise to such a dizzy
          height!