46.Doubt in
          Doubt.—“What a good pillow
          doubt is for a well-balanced head!”This saying of[pg 053]Montaigne always
          made Pascal angry, for nobody ever wanted a good pillow so much as
          he did. Whatever was the matter with him?47.Words block up
          our Path.—Wherever primitive men put down a word,
          they thought they had made a discovery. How different the case
          really was!—they had come upon a problem, and, while they thought
          they had solved it, they had in reality placed an obstacle in the
          way of its solution. Now, with every new piece of knowledge, we
          stumble over petrified words and mummified conceptions, and would
          rather break a leg than a word in doing so.48.“Know Thyself”is the Whole of
          Science.—Only when man shall have acquired a
          knowledge of all things will he be able to know himself. For things
          are but the boundaries of man.49.The New
          Fundamental Feeling: our Final Corruptibility.—In
          former times people sought to show the feeling of man's greatness
          by pointing to his divine descent. This, however, has now become a
          forbidden path, for the ape stands at its entrance, and likewise
          other fearsome animals, showing their teeth in a knowing fashion,
          as if to say, No further this way! Hence people now try the
          opposite direction: the road along which humanity is proceeding
          shall stand as an indication of their[pg 054]greatness and their relationship to God. But
          alas! this, too, is useless! At the far end of this path stands the
          funeral urn of the last man and grave-digger (with the inscription,Nihil humani a me alienum puto).
          To whatever height mankind may have developed—and perhaps in the
          end it will not be so high as when they began!—there is as little
          prospect of their attaining to a higher order as there is for the
          ant and the earwig to enter into kinship with God and eternity at
          the end of their career on earth. What is to come will drag behind
          it that which has passed: why should any little star, or even any
          little species on that star, form an exception to that eternal
          drama? Away with such sentimentalities!50.Belief in
          Inebriation.—Those men who have moments of sublime
          ecstasy, and who, on ordinary occasions, on account of the contrast
          and the excessive wearing away of their nervous forces, usually
          feel miserable and desolate, come to consider such moments as the
          true manifestation of their real selves, of their“ego,”and their misery and dejection, on the
          other hand, as theeffect of the“non-ego”. This is why they think of their
          environment, the age in which they live, and the whole world in
          which they have their being, with feelings of vindictiveness. This
          intoxication appears to them as their true life, their actual ego;
          and everywhere else they see only those who strive to oppose and
          prevent this intoxication, whether of an intellectual, moral,
          religious, or artistic nature.[pg 055]Humanity owes no
          small part of its evils to these fantastic enthusiasts; for they
          are the insatiable sowers of the weed of discontent with one's self
          and one's neighbour, of contempt for the world and the age, and,
          above all, of world-lassitude. An entire hell of criminals could
          not, perhaps, bring about such unfortunate and far-reaching
          consequences, such heavy and disquieting effects that corrupt earth
          and sky, as are brought about by that“noble”little community of unbridled,
          fantastic, half-mad people—of geniuses, too—who cannot control
          themselves, or experience any inward joy, until they have lost
          themselves completely: while, on the other hand, the criminal often
          gives a proof of his admirable self-control, sacrifice, and wisdom,
          and thus maintains these qualities in those who fear him. Through
          him life's sky may at times seem overcast and threatening, but the
          atmosphere ever remains brisk and vigorous.—Furthermore, these
          enthusiasts bring their entire strength to bear on the task of
          imbuing mankind with belief in inebriation as in life itself: a
          dreadful belief! As savages are now quickly corrupted and ruined by“fire-water,”so likewise has
          mankind in general been slowly though thoroughly corrupted by these
          spiritual“fire-waters”of
          intoxicating feelings and by those who keep alive the craving for
          them. It may yet be ruined thereby.51.Such as we
          still are.—“Let us be
          indulgent to the great one-eyed!”said Stuart Mill, as if it[pg 056]were necessary to
          ask for indulgence when we are willing to believe and almost to
          worship them. I say: Let us be indulgent towards the two-eyed, both
          great and small; for,such as we are now, we shall never
          rise beyond indulgence!52.Where are the
          New Physicians of the Soul?—It is the means of
          consolation which have stamped life with that fundamental
          melancholy character in which we now believe: the worst disease of
          mankind has arisen from the struggle against diseases, and apparent
          remedies have in the long run brought about worse conditions than
          those which it was intended to remove by their use. Men, in their
          ignorance, used to believe that the stupefying and intoxicating
          means, which appeared to act immediately, the so-called“consolations,”were the true
          healing powers: they even failed to observe that they had often to
          pay for their immediate relief by a general and profound
          deterioration in health, that the sick ones had to suffer from the
          after-effects of the intoxication, then from the absence of the
          intoxication, and, later on, from a feeling of disquietude,
          depression, nervous starts, and ill-health. Again, men whose
          illness had advanced to a certain extent never recovered from
          it—those physicians of the soul, universally believed in and
          worshipped as they were, took care of that.It has been
          justly said of Schopenhauer that he was one who again took the
          sufferings of humanity seriously: where is the man who will at
          length take[pg
          057]the antidotes against these sufferings seriously, and who will
          pillory the unheard-of quackery with which men, even up to our own
          age, and in the most sublime nomenclature, have been wont to treat
          the illnesses of their souls?53.Abuse of the
          Conscientious Ones.—It is the conscientious, and not
          the unscrupulous, who have suffered so greatly from exhortations to
          penitence and the fear of hell, especially if they happened to be
          men of imagination. In other words, a gloom has been cast over the
          lives of those who had the greatest need of cheerfulness and
          agreeable images—not only for the sake of their own consolation and
          recovery from themselves, but that humanity itself might take
          delight in them and absorb a ray of their beauty. Alas, how much
          superfluous cruelty and torment have been brought about by those
          religions which invented sin! and by those men who, by means of
          such religions, desired to reach the highest enjoyment of their
          power!54.Thoughts on
          Disease.—To soothe the imagination of the patient, in
          order that he may at least no longer keep on thinking about his
          illness, and thus suffer more from such thoughts than from the
          complaint itself, which has been the case hitherto—that, it seems
          to me, is something! and it is by no means a trifle! And now do ye
          understand our task?[pg 058]55.The“Ways.”—So-called“short cuts”have always led
          humanity to run great risks: on hearing the“glad tidings”that a“short cut”had been found, they always left the
          straight path—and lost their way.56.The Apostate of
          the Free Spirit.—Is there any one, then, who
          seriously dislikes pious people who hold formally to their belief?
          Do we not, on the contrary, regard them with silent esteem and
          pleasure, deeply regretting at the same time that these excellent
          people do not share our own feelings? But whence arises that
          sudden, profound, and unreasonable dislike for the man who, having
          at one time possessed freedom of spirit, finally becomes a“believer”? In thinking of him we
          involuntarily experience the sensation of having beheld some
          loathsome spectacle, which we must quickly efface from our
          recollection. Should we not turn our backs upon even the most
          venerated man if we entertained the least suspicion of him in this
          regard? Not, indeed, from a moral point of view, but because of
          sudden disgust and horror! Whence comes this sharpness of feeling?
          Perhaps we shall be given to understand that, at bottom, we are not
          quite certain of our own selves? Or that, early in life, we build
          round ourselves hedges of the most pointed contempt, in order that,
          when old age makes us weak and forgetful, we may not feel inclined
          to brush our own contempt away from us?[pg 059]Now, speaking
          frankly, this suspicion is quite erroneous, and whoever forms it
          knows nothing of what agitates and determines the free spirit: how
          little, to him, does thechangingof an opinion seem
          contemptibleper se! On the
          contrary, how highly he prizes theabilityto change an opinion as a rare and valuable distinction, especially
          if he can retain it far into old age! And his pride (not his
          pusillanimity) even reaches so high as to be able to pluck the
          fruits of thespernere se sperniand thespernere se ipsum: without his
          being troubled by the sensation of fear of vain and easy-going men.
          Furthermore, the doctrine of the innocence of all opinions appears
          to him to be as certain as the doctrine of the innocence of all
          actions: how could he act as judge and hangman before the apostate
          of intellectual liberty! On the contrary, the sight of such a
          person would disgust him as much as the sight of a nauseous illness
          disgusts the physician: the physical repulsion caused by everything
          spongy, soft, and suppurating momentarily overcomes reason and the
          desire to help. Hence our goodwill is overcome by the conception of
          the monstrous dishonesty which must have gained the upper hand in
          the apostate from the free spirit: by the conception of a general
          gnawing which is eating its way down even to the framework of the
          character.57.Other Fears,
          other Safeties.—Christianity overspread life with a
          new and unlimitedinsecurity, thereby creating new
          safeties, enjoyments[pg
          060]and recreations, and new valuations of all things. Our own century
          denies the existence of this insecurity, and does so with a good
          conscience, yet it clings to the old habit of Christian
          certainties, enjoyments, recreations, and valuations!—even in its
          noblest arts and philosophies. How feeble and worn out must all
          this now seem, how imperfect and clumsy, how arbitrarily fanatical,
          and, above all, how uncertain: now that its horrible contrast has
          been taken away—the ever-present fear of the Christian for hiseternalsalvation!58.Christianity
          and the Emotions.—In Christianity we may see a great
          popular protest against philosophy: the reasoning of the sages of
          antiquity had withdrawn men from the influence of the emotions, but
          Christianity would fain give men their emotions back again. With
          this aim in view, it denies any moral value to virtue such as
          philosophers understood it—as a victory of the reason over the
          passions—generally condemns every kind of goodness, and calls upon
          the passions to manifest themselves in their full power and glory:
          asloveof God,fearof
          God, fanaticbeliefin God, blindhopein
          God.59.Error as a
          Cordial.—Let people say what they will, it is
          nevertheless certain that it was the aim of Christianity to deliver
          mankind from the yoke of moral engagements by indicating what it[pg 061]believed to be theshortest
          way to perfection: exactly in the same manner as a few
          philosophers thought they could dispense with tedious and laborious
          dialectics, and the collection of strictly-proved facts, and point
          out a royal road to truth. It was an error in both cases, but
          nevertheless a great cordial for those who were worn out and
          despairing in the wilderness.60.All Spirit
          finally becomes Visible.—Christianity has assimilated
          the entire spirituality of an incalculable number of men who were
          by nature submissive, all those enthusiasts of humiliation and
          reverence, both refined and coarse. It has in this way freed itself
          from its own original rustic coarseness—of which we are vividly
          reminded when we look at the oldest image of St. Peter the
          Apostle—and has become a very intellectual religion, with thousands
          of wrinkles,arrière-pensées, and masks on
          its face. It has made European humanity more clever, and not only
          cunning from a theological standpoint. By the spirit which it has
          thus given to European humanity—in conjunction with the power of
          abnegation, and very often in conjunction with the profound
          conviction and loyalty of that abnegation—it has perhaps chiselled
          and shaped the most subtle individualities which have ever existed
          in human society: the individualities of the higher ranks of the
          Catholic clergy, especially when these priests have sprung from a
          noble family, and have brought to their work, from the very
          beginning, the innate grace of gesture, the dominating glance[pg 062]of the eye, and
          beautiful hands and feet. Here the human face acquires that
          spiritualisation brought about by the continual ebb and flow of two
          kinds of happiness (the feeling of power and the feeling of
          submission) after a carefully-planned manner of living has
          conquered the beast in man. Here an activity, which consists in
          blessing, forgiving sins, and representing the Almighty, ever keeps
          alive in the soul,and even in the body, the
          consciousness of a supreme mission; here we find that noble
          contempt concerning the perishable nature of the body, of
          well-being, and of happiness, peculiar to born soldiers: theirpridelies in obedience, a
          distinctly aristocratic trait; their excuse and their idealism
          arise from the enormous impossibility of their task. The surpassing
          beauty and subtleties of these princes of the Church have always
          proved to the people the truth of the Church; a momentary
          brutalisation of the clergy (such as came about in Luther's time)
          always tended to encourage the contrary belief. And would it be
          maintained that this result of beauty and human subtlety, shown in
          harmony of figure, intellect, and task, would come to an end with
          religions? and that nothing higher could be obtained, or even
          conceived?61.The Needful
          Sacrifice.—Those earnest, able, and just men of
          profound feelings, who are still Christians at heart, owe it to
          themselves to make one attempt to live for a certain space of time
          without Christianity! they owe itto their
          faiththat they should thus for once take up their[pg 063]abode“in the wilderness”—if for no other reason than
          that of being able to pronounce on the question as to whether
          Christianity is needful. So far, however, they have confined
          themselves to their own narrow domain and insulted every one who
          happened to be outside of it: yea, they even become highly
          irritated when it is suggested to them that beyond this little
          domain of theirs lies the great world, and that Christianity is,
          after all, only a corner of it! No; your evidence on the question
          will be valueless until you have lived year after year without
          Christianity, and with the inmost desire to continue to exist
          without it: until, indeed, you have withdrawn far, far away from
          it. It is not when your nostalgia urges you back again, but when
          your judgment, based on a strict comparison, drives you back, that
          your homecoming has any significance!—Men of coming generations
          will deal in this manner with all the valuations of the past; they
          must be voluntarilylivedover again, together with
          their contraries, in order that such men may finally acquire the
          right of shifting them.62.On the Origin
          of Religions.—How can any one regard his own opinion
          of things as a revelation? This is the problem of the formation of
          religions: there has always been some man in whom this phenomenon
          was possible. A postulate is that such a man already believed in
          revelations. Suddenly, however, a new idea occurs to him one day,hisidea; and the entire
          blessedness of a great[pg
          064]personal hypothesis, which embraces all existence and the whole
          world, penetrates with such force into his conscience that he dare
          not think himself the creator of such blessedness, and he therefore
          attributes to his God the cause of this new idea and likewise the
          cause of the cause, believing it to be the revelation of his God.
          How could a man be the author of so great a happiness? ask his
          pessimistic doubts. But other levers are secretly at work: an
          opinion may be strengthened by one's self if it be considered as a
          revelation; and in this way all its hypothetic nature is removed;
          the matter is set beyond criticism and even beyond doubt: it is
          sanctified. It is true that, in this way, a man lowers himself to
          playing the rôle of“mouthpiece,”but his thought will end by being victorious as a divine
          thought—the feeling of finally gaining the victory conquers the
          feeling of degradation. There is also another feeling in the
          background: if a man raises his products above himself, and thus
          apparently detracts from his own worth, there nevertheless remains
          a kind of joyfulness, paternal love, and paternal pride, which
          compensates man—more than compensates man—for everything.63.Hatred of One's
          Neighbour.—Supposing that we felt towards our
          neighbour as he does himself—Schopenhauer calls this compassion,
          though it would be more correct to call it auto-passion,
          fellow-feeling—we should be compelled to hate him, if, like Pascal,
          he thought himself hateful. And this was[pg 065]probably the general feeling of Pascal
          regarding mankind, and also that of ancient Christianity, which,
          under Nero, was“convicted”ofodium generis humani, as Tacitus
          has recorded.64.The
          Broken-Hearted Ones.—Christianity has the instinct of
          a hunter for finding out all those who may by hook or by crook be
          driven to despair—only a very small number of men can be brought to
          this despair. Christianity lies in wait for such as those, and
          pursues them. Pascal made an attempt to find out whether it was not
          possible, with the help of the very subtlest knowledge, to drive
          everybody into despair. He failed: to his second despair.65.Brahminism and
          Christianity.—There are certain precepts for
          obtaining a consciousness of power: on the one hand, for those who
          already know how to control themselves, and who are therefore
          already quite used to the feeling of power; and, on the other hand,
          for those who cannot control themselves. Brahminism has given its
          care to the former type of man; Christianity to the latter.66.The Faculty of
          Vision.—During the whole of the Middle Ages it was
          believed that the real distinguishing trait of higher men was the
          faculty of[pg
          066]having visions—that is to say, of having a grave mental trouble.
          And, in fact, the rules of life of all the higher natures of the
          Middle Ages (the religiosi) were drawn up with the object of making
          man capable of vision! Little wonder, then, that the exaggerated
          esteem for these half-mad fanatics, so-called men of genius, has
          continued even to our own days.“They have
          seen things that others do not see”—no doubt! and this fact
          should inspire us with caution where they are concerned, and not
          with belief!67.The Price of
          Believers.—He who sets such a value on being believed
          in has to promise heaven in recompense for this belief: and every
          one, even a thief on the Cross, must have suffered from a terrible
          doubt and experienced crucifixion in every form: otherwise he would
          not buy his followers so dearly.68.The First
          Christian.—The whole world still believes in the
          literary career of the“Holy Ghost,”or is still influenced by the effects of this belief: when we look
          into our Bibles we do so for the purpose of“edifying ourselves,”to find a few words of
          comfort for our misery, be it great or small—in short, we read
          ourselves into it and out of it. But who—apart from a few learned
          men—know that it likewise records the history of one of the most
          ambitious and importunate souls that ever[pg 067]existed, of a mind full of superstition and
          cunning: the history of the Apostle Paul? Nevertheless, without
          this singular history, without the tribulations and passions of
          such a mind, and of such a soul, there would have been no Christian
          kingdom; we should have scarcely have even heard of a little Jewish
          sect, the founder of which died on the Cross. It is true that, if
          this history had been understood in time, if we had read,really
          read, the writings of St. Paul, not as the revelations
          of the“Holy Ghost,”but with honest
          and independent minds, oblivious of all our personal troubles—there
          were no such readers for fifteen centuries—it would have been all
          up with Christianity long ago: so searchingly do these writings of
          the Jewish Pascal lay bare the origins of Christianity, just as the
          French Pascal let us see its destiny and how it will ultimately
          perish. That the ship of Christianity threw overboard no
          inconsiderable part of its Jewish ballast, that it was able to sail
          into the waters of the heathen and actually did do so: this is due
          to the history of one single man, this apostle who was so greatly
          troubled in mind and so worthy of pity, but who was also very
          disagreeable to himself and to others.This man
          suffered from a fixed idea, or rather a fixed question, an
          ever-present and ever-burning question: what was themeaningof the Jewish Law? and, more especially,the fulfilment of
          this Law? In his youth he had done his best to satisfy
          it, thirsting as he did for that highest distinction which the Jews
          could imagine—this people, which raised the imagination of moral
          loftiness to a greater elevation than any other people, and which
          alone succeeded[pg
          068]in uniting the conception of a holy God with the idea of sin
          considered as an offence against this holiness. St. Paul became at
          once the fanatic defender and guard-of-honour of this God and His
          Law. Ceaselessly battling against and lying in wait for all
          transgressors of this Law and those who presumed to doubt it, he
          was pitiless and cruel towards all evil-doers, whom he would fain
          have punished in the most rigorous fashion possible.Now, however, he
          was aware in his own person of the fact that such a man as
          himself—violent, sensual, melancholy, and malicious in his
          hatred—couldnot fulfil the Law; and
          furthermore, what seemed strangest of all to him, he saw that his
          boundless craving for power was continually provoked to break it,
          and that he could not help yielding to this impulse. Was it really“the flesh”which made him a
          trespasser time and again? Was it not rather, as it afterwards
          occurred to him, the Law itself, which continually showed itself to
          be impossible to fulfil, and seduced men into transgression with an
          irresistible charm? But at that time he had not thought of this
          means of escape. As he suggests here and there, he had many things
          on his conscience—hatred, murder, sorcery, idolatry, debauchery,
          drunkenness, and orgiastic revelry,—and to however great an extent
          he tried to soothe his conscience, and, even more, his desire for
          power, by the extreme fanaticism of his worship for and defence of
          the Law, there were times when the thought struck him:“It is all in vain! The anguish of the unfulfilled Law
          cannot be overcome.”Luther must have experienced similar[pg 069]feelings, when, in
          his cloister, he endeavoured to become the ideal man of his
          imagination; and, as Luther one day began to hate the
          ecclesiastical ideal, and the Pope, and the saints, and the whole
          clergy, with a hatred which was all the more deadly as he could not
          avow it even to himself, an analogous feeling took possession of
          St. Paul. The Law was the Cross on which he felt himself crucified.
          How he hated it! What a grudge he owed it! How he began to look
          round on all sides to find a means for its total annihilation, that
          he might no longer be obliged to fulfil it himself! And at last a
          liberating thought, together with a vision—which was only to be
          expected in the case of an epileptic like himself—flashed into his
          mind: to him, the stern upholder of the Law—who, in his innermost
          heart, was tired to death of it—there appeared on the lonely path
          that Christ, with the divine effulgence on His countenance, and
          Paul heard the words:“Why persecutest thou
          Me?”What actually
          took place, then, was this: his mind was suddenly enlightened, and
          he said to himself:“It is unreasonable to
          persecute this Jesus Christ! Here is my means of escape, here is my
          complete vengeance, here and nowhere else have I the destroyer of
          the Law in my hands!”The sufferer from anguished pride felt
          himself restored to health all at once, his moral despair
          disappeared in the air; for morality itself was blown away,
          annihilated—that is to say,fulfilled, there on the Cross! Up
          to that time that ignominious death had seemed to him to be the
          principal argument against the“Messiahship”[pg 070]proclaimed by the followers of the new
          doctrine: but what if it were necessary for doing away with the
          Law? The enormous consequences of this thought, of this solution of
          the enigma, danced before his eyes, and he at once became the
          happiest of men. The destiny of the Jews, yea, of all mankind,
          seemed to him to be intertwined with this instantaneous flash of
          enlightenment: he held the thought of thoughts, the key of keys,
          the light of lights; history would henceforth revolve round him!
          For from that time forward he would be the apostle of theannihilation of the Law! To be
          dead to sin—that meant to be dead to the Law also; to be in the
          flesh—that meant to be under the Law! To be one with Christ—that
          meant to have become, like Him, the destroyer of the Law; to be
          dead with Him—that meant likewise to be dead to the Law. Even if it
          were still possible to sin, it would not at any rate be possible to
          sin against the Law:“I am above the
          Law,”thinks Paul; adding,“If I
          were now to acknowledge the Law again and to submit to it, I should
          make Christ an accomplice in the sin”; for the Law was there
          for the purpose of producing sin and setting it in the foreground,
          as an emetic produces sickness. God could not have decided upon the
          death of Christ had it been possible to fulfil the Law without it;
          henceforth, not only are all sins expiated, but sin itself is
          abolished; henceforth the Law is dead; henceforth“the flesh”in which it dwelt is dead—or at all
          events dying, gradually wasting away. To live for a short time
          longer amid this decay!—this is the Christian's fate, until the
          time when, having become[pg
          071]one with Christ, he arises with Him, sharing with Christ the divine
          glory, and becoming, like Christ, a“Son of
          God.”Then Paul's exaltation was at its height, and with it
          the importunity of his soul—the thought of union with Christ made
          him lose all shame, all submission, all constraint, and his
          ungovernable ambition was shown to be revelling in the expectation
          of divine glories.Such was the
          first Christian, the inventor of Christianity! before him there
          were only a few Jewish sectaries.69.Inimitable.—There is an
          enormous strain and distance between envy and friendship, between
          self-contempt and pride: the Greek lived in the former, the
          Christian in the latter.70.The Use of a
          Coarse Intellect.—The Christian Church is an
          encyclopædia of primitive cults and views of the most varied
          origin; and is, in consequence, well adapted to missionary work: in
          former times she could—and still does—go wherever she would, and in
          doing so always found something resembling herself, to which she
          could assimilate herself and gradually substitute her own spirit
          for it. It is not to what is Christian in her usages, but to what
          is universally pagan in them, that we have to attribute the
          development of this universal religion. Her thoughts, which have
          their origin at once in the Judaic and in the Hellenic spirit, were
          able from the very beginning to raise[pg 072]themselves above the exclusiveness and
          subtleties of races and nations, as above prejudices. Although we
          may admire the power which makes even the most difficult things
          coalesce, we must nevertheless not overlook the contemptible
          qualities of this power—the astonishing coarseness and narrowness
          of the Church's intellect when it was in process of formation, a
          coarseness which permitted it to accommodate itself to any diet,
          and to digest contradictions like pebbles.71.The Christian
          Vengeance against Rome.—Perhaps nothing is more
          fatiguing than the sight of a continual conqueror: for more than
          two hundred years the world had seen Rome overcoming one nation
          after another, the circle was closed, all future seemed to be at an
          end, everything was done with a view to its lasting for all
          time—yea, when the Empire built anything it was erected with a view
          to beingaere perennius.
          We, who know only the“melancholy of
          ruins,”can scarcely understand that totally differentmelancholy of eternal buildings,
          from which men endeavoured to save themselves as best they
          could—with the light-hearted fancy of a Horace, for example. Others
          sought different consolations for the weariness which was closely
          akin to despair, against the deadening knowledge that from
          henceforth all progress of thought and heart would be hopeless,
          that the huge spider sat everywhere and mercilessly continued to
          drink all the blood within its reach, no matter where it might
          spring forth.[pg
          073]This mute, century-old hatred of the wearied spectators against
          Rome, wherever Rome's domination extended, was at length vented in
          Christianity, which united Rome,“the
          world,”and“sin”into a
          single conception. The Christians took their revenge on Rome by
          proclaiming the immediate and sudden destruction of the world; by
          once more introducing a future—for Rome had been able to transform
          everything into the history of itsownpast and present—a future in which Rome was no longer the most
          important factor; and by dreaming of the last judgment—while the
          crucified Jew, as the symbol of salvation, was the greatest
          derision on the superb Roman prætors in the provinces; for now they
          seemed to be only the symbols of ruin and a“world”ready to perish.