72.The“Life after Death.”—Christianity
          found the idea of punishment in hell in the entire Roman Empire:
          for the numerous mystic cults have hatched this idea with
          particular satisfaction as being the most fecund egg of their
          power. Epicurus thought he could do nothing better for his
          followers than to tear this belief up by the roots: his triumph
          found its finest echo in the mouth of one of his disciples, the
          Roman Lucretius, a poet of a gloomy, though afterwards enlightened,
          temperament. Alas! his triumph had come too soon: Christianity took
          under its special protection this belief in subterranean horrors,
          which was already beginning to die away in the minds of men; and
          that[pg 074]was clever of it.
          For, without this audacious leap into the most complete paganism,
          how could it have proved itself victorious over the popularity of
          Mithras and Isis? In this way it managed to bring timorous folk
          over to its side—the most enthusiastic adherents of a new faith!
          The Jews, being a people which, like the Greeks, and even in a
          greater degree than the Greeks, loved and still love life, had not
          cultivated that idea to any great extent: the thought of final
          death as the punishment of the sinner, death without resurrection
          as an extreme menace: this was sufficient to impress these peculiar
          men, who did not wish to get rid of their bodies, but hoped, with
          their refined Egypticism, to preserve them for ever. (A Jewish
          martyr, about whom we may read in the Second Book of the Maccabees,
          would not think of giving up his intestines, which had been torn
          out: he wanted to have them at the resurrection: quite a Jewish
          characteristic!)Thoughts of
          eternal damnation were far from the minds of the early Christians:
          they thought they weredeliveredfrom death, and awaited
          a transformation from day to day, but not death. (What a curious
          effect the first death must have produced on these expectant
          people! How many different feelings must have been mingled
          together—astonishment, exultation, doubt, shame, and passion!
          Verily, a subject worthy of a great artist!) St. Paul could say
          nothing better in praise of his Saviour than that he had opened the
          gates of immortality to everybody—he did not believe in the
          resurrection of those who had not been saved: more[pg 075]than this, by reason of his doctrine of
          the impossibility of carrying out the Law, and of death considered
          as a consequence of sin, he even suspected that, up to that time,
          no one had become immortal (or at all events only a very few,
          solely owing to special grace and not to any merits of their own):
          it was only in his time that immortality had begun to open its
          gates—and only a few of the elect would finally gain admittance, as
          the pride of the elect cannot help saying.In other places,
          where the impulse towards life was not so strong as among the Jews
          and the Christian Jews, and where the prospect of immortality did
          not appear to be more valuable than the prospect of a final death,
          that pagan, yet not altogether un-Jewish addition of Hell became a
          very useful tool in the hands of the missionaries: then arose the
          new doctrine that even the sinners and the unsaved are immortal,
          the doctrine of eternal damnation, which was more powerful than the
          idea of afinal death, which thereafter
          began to fade away. It was science alone which could overcome this
          idea, at the same time brushing aside all other ideas about death
          and an after-life. We are poorer in one particular: the“life after death”has no further
          interest for us! an indescribable blessing, which is as yet too
          recent to be considered as such throughout the world. And Epicurus
          is once more triumphant.73.For the“Truth”!—“The truth of Christianity was attested by the virtuous
          lives of the[pg
          076]Christians, their firmness in suffering, their unshakable belief
          and above all by the spread and increase of the faith in spite of
          all calamities.”—That's how you talk even now. The more's
          the pity. Learn, then, that all this proves nothing either in
          favour of truth or against it; that truth must be demonstrated
          differently from conscientiousness, and that the latter is in no
          respect whatever an argument in favour of the former.74.A
          ChristianArrière-pensée.—Would
          not this have been a general reservation among Christians of the
          first century:“It is better to persuade
          ourselves into the belief that we are guilty rather than that we
          are innocent; for it is impossible to ascertain the disposition of
          so powerful a judge—but it is to be feared that he is looking out
          only for those who are conscious of guilt. Bearing in mind his
          great power, it is more likely that he will pardon a guilty person
          than admit that any one is innocent, in his presence.”This
          was the feeling of poor provincial folk in the presence of the
          Roman prætor:“He is too proud for us to
          dare to be innocent.”And may not this very sentiment have
          made its influence felt when the Christians endeavoured to picture
          to themselves the aspect of the Supreme Judge?75.Neither
          European nor Noble.—There is something Oriental and
          feminine in Christianity, and[pg 077]this is shown in the thought,“Whom the Lord loveth, He chasteneth”; for women
          in the Orient consider castigations and the strict seclusion of
          their persons from the world as a sign of their husband's love, and
          complain if these signs of love cease.76.If you think it
          Evil, you make it Evil.—The passions become evil and
          malignant when regarded with evil and malignant eyes. It is in this
          way that Christianity has succeeded in transforming Eros and
          Aphrodite—sublime powers, capable of idealisation—into hellish
          genii and phantom goblins, by means of the pangs which every sexual
          impulse was made to raise in the conscience of the believers. Is it
          not a dreadful thing to transform necessary and regular sensations
          into a source of inward misery, and thus arbitrarily to render
          interior misery necessary and regularin the case of
          every man! Furthermore, this misery remains secret with
          the result that it is all the more deeply rooted, for it is not all
          men who have the courage, which Shakespeare shows in his sonnets,
          of making public their Christian gloom on this point.Must a feeling,
          then, always be called evil against which we are forced to
          struggle, which we must restrain even within certain limits, or, in
          given cases, banish entirely from our minds? Is it not the habit of
          vulgar souls always to call anenemyevil! and must we call Eros an enemy? The sexual feelings, like the
          feelings of pity and adoration, possess the particular
          characteristic that, in their case, one being[pg 078]gratifies another by the pleasure he
          enjoys—it is but rarely that we meet with such a benevolent
          arrangement in nature. And yet we calumniate and corrupt it all by
          our bad conscience! We connect the procreation of man with a bad
          conscience!But the outcome
          of this diabolisation of Eros is a mere farce: the“demon”Eros becomes an object of greater
          interest to mankind than all the angels and saints put together,
          thanks to the mysterious Mumbo-Jumboism of the Church in all things
          erotic: it is due to the Church that love stories, even in our own
          time, have become the one common interest which appeals to all
          classes of people—with an exaggeration which would be
          incomprehensible to antiquity, and which will not fail to provoke
          roars of laughter in coming generations. All our poetising and
          thinking, from the highest to the lowest, is marked, and more than
          marked, by the exaggerated importance bestowed upon the love story
          as the principal item of our existence. Posterity may perhaps, on
          this account, come to the conclusion that its entire legacy of
          Christian culture is tainted with narrowness and insanity.77.The Tortures of
          the Soul.—The whole world raises a shout of horror at
          the present day if one man presumes to torture the body of another:
          the indignation against such a being bursts forth almost
          spontaneously. Nay; we tremble even at the very thought of torture
          being inflicted on a man or an animal, and we undergo unspeakable[pg 079]misery when we hear
          of such an act having been accomplished. But the same feeling is
          experienced in a very much lesser degree and extent when it is a
          question of the tortures of the soul and the dreadfulness of their
          infliction. Christianity has introduced such tortures on an
          unprecedented scale, and still continues to preach this kind of
          martyrdom—yea, it even complains innocently of backsliding and
          indifference when it meets with a state of soul which is free from
          such agonies. From all this it now results that humanity, in the
          face of spiritual racks, tortures of the mind, and instruments of
          punishment, behaves even to-day with the same awesome patience and
          indecision which it exhibited in former times in the presence of
          the cruelties practised on the bodies of men or animals. Hell has
          certainly not remained merely an empty sound; and a new kind of
          pity has been devised to correspond to the newly-created fears of
          hell—a horrible and ponderous compassion, hitherto unknown; with
          people“irrevocably condemned to
          hell,”as, for example, the Stony Guest gave Don Juan to
          understand, and which, during the Christian era, should often have
          made the very stones weep.Plutarch
          presents us with a gloomy picture of the state of mind of a
          superstitious man in pagan times: but this picture pales when
          compared with that of a Christian of the Middle Ages, whosupposesthat nothing can save him
          from“torments everlasting.”Dreadful omens appear to him: perhaps he sees a stork holding a
          snake in his beak and hesitating to swallow it. Or all nature
          suddenly becomes pale; or bright, fiery colours appear across the
          surface[pg
          080]of the earth. Or the ghosts of his dead relations approach him,
          with features showing traces of dreadful sufferings. Or the dark
          walls of the room in which the man is sleeping are suddenly lighted
          up, and there, amidst a yellow flame, he perceives instruments of
          torture and a motley horde of snakes and devils. Christianity has
          surely turned this world of ours into a fearful habitation by
          raising the crucifix in all parts and thereby proclaiming the earth
          to be a place“where the just man is
          tortured to death!”And when the ardour of some great
          preacher for once disclosed to the public the secret sufferings of
          the individual, the agonies of the lonely souls, when, for example,
          Whitefield preached“like a dying man to
          the dying,”now bitterly weeping, now violently stamping his
          feet, speaking passionately, in abrupt and incisive tones, without
          fearing to turn the whole force of his attack upon any one
          individual present, excluding him from the assembly with excessive
          harshness—then indeed did it seem as if the earth were being
          transformed into a“field of evil.”The huge crowds were then seen to act as if seized with a sudden
          attack of madness: many were in fits of anguish; others lay
          unconscious and motionless; others, again, trembled or rent the air
          with their piercing shrieks. Everywhere there was a loud breathing,
          as of half-choked people who were gasping for the breath of life.“Indeed,”said an eye-witness once,“almost all the noises appeared to come
          from people who were dying in the bitterest agony.”Let us never
          forget that it was Christianity which first turned the death-bed
          into a bed of agony, and[pg
          081]that, by the scenes which took place there, and the terrifying
          sounds which were made possible there for the first time, it has
          poisoned the senses and the blood of innumerable witnesses and
          their children. Imagine the ordinary man who can never efface the
          recollection of words like these:“Oh,
          eternity! Would that I had no soul! Would that I had never been
          born! My soul is damned, damned; lost for ever! Six days ago you
          might have helped me. But now all is over. I belong to the devil,
          and with him I will go down to hell. Break, break, ye poor hearts
          of stone! Ye will not break? What more can be done for hearts of
          stone? I am damned that ye may be saved! There he is! Yea; there he
          is! Come, good devil! Come!”78.Avenging
          Justice.—Misfortune and guilt: these two things have
          been put on one scale by Christianity; so that, when the misfortune
          which follows a fault is a serious one, this fault is always judged
          accordingly to be a very heinous one. But this was not the
          valuation of antiquity, and that is why Greek tragedy—in which
          misfortune and punishment are discussed at length, and yet in
          another sense—forms part of the great liberators of the mind to an
          extent which even the ancients themselves could not realise. They
          remained ingenuous enough not to set up an“adequate relation”between guilt and
          misfortune. The guilt of their tragic heroes is, indeed, the little
          pebble that makes them stumble, and on which account they[pg 082]sometimes happen to
          break an arm or knock out an eye. Upon this the feeling of
          antiquity made the comment,“Well, he
          should have gone his way with more caution and less pride.”It was reserved for Christianity, however, to say:“Here we have a great misfortune, and behind this great
          misfortune there must lie a great fault, an equallyserious
          fault, though we cannot clearly see it! If, wretched
          man, you do not feel it, it is because your heart is hardened—and
          worse than this will happen to you!”Besides this,
          antiquity could point to examples of real misfortunes, misfortunes
          that were pure and innocent; it was only with the advent of
          Christianity that all punishment became well-merited punishment: in
          addition to this it renders the imagination of the sufferer still
          more suffering, so that the victim, in the midst of his distress,
          is seized with the feeling that he has been morally reproved and
          cast away. Poor humanity! The Greeks had a special word to stand
          for the feeling of indignation which was experienced at the
          misfortune of another: among Christian peoples this feeling was
          prohibited and was not permitted to develop; hence the reason why
          they have no name for thismore virilebrother of pity.79.A
          Proposal.—If, according to the arguments of Pascal
          and Christianity, our ego is always hateful, how can we permit and
          suppose other people, whether God or men, to love it? It would be
          contrary to all good principles to let ourselves be[pg 083]loved when we know very well that we
          deserve nothing but hatred—not to speak of other repugnant
          feelings.“But this is the very Kingdom of
          Grace.”Then you look upon your love for your neighbour as a
          grace? Your pity as a grace? Well, then, if you can do all this,
          there is no reason why you should not go a step further: love
          yourselves through grace, and then you will no longer find your God
          necessary, and the entire drama of the Fall and Redemption of
          mankind will reach its last act in yourselves!80.The
          Compassionate Christian.—A Christian's compassion in
          the presence of his neighbour's suffering has another side to it:
          viz. his profound suspicion of all the joy of his neighbour, of his
          neighbour's joy in everything that he wills and is able to do.81.The Saint's
          Humanity.—A saint had fallen into the company of
          believers, and could no longer stand their continually expressed
          hatred for sin. At last he said to them:“God created all things, except sin: therefore it is no
          wonder that He does not like it. But man has created sin, and why,
          then, should he disown this only child of his merely because it is
          not regarded with a friendly eye by God, its grandfather? Is that
          human? Honour to whom honour is due—but one's heart and duty must
          speak, above all, in favour of the child—and only in the second
          place for the honour of the grandfather!”[pg 084]82.The Theological
          Attack.—“You must arrange
          that with yourself; for your life is at stake!”—Luther it is
          who suddenly springs upon us with these words and imagines that we
          feel the knife at our throats. But we throw him off with the words
          of one higher and more considerate than he:“We need form no opinion in regard to this or that
          matter, and thus save our souls from trouble. For, by their very
          nature, the things themselves cannot compel us to express an
          opinion.”83.Poor
          Humanity!—A single drop of blood too much or too
          little in the brain may render our life unspeakably miserable and
          difficult, and we may suffer more from this single drop of blood
          than Prometheus from his vulture. But the worst is when we do not
          know that this drop is causing our sufferings—and we think it is“the devil!”Or“sin!”84.The Philology
          of Christianity.—How little Christianity cultivates
          the sense of honesty can be inferred from the character of the
          writings of its learned men. They set out their conjectures as
          audaciously as if they were dogmas, and are but seldom at a
          disadvantage in regard to the interpretation of Scripture. Their
          continual cry is:“I am right, for it is
          written”—and then follows an explanation so shameless and
          capricious that a[pg
          085]philologist, when he hears it, must stand stock-still between anger
          and laughter, asking himself again and again: Is it possible? Is it
          honest? Is it even decent?It is only those
          who never—or always—attend church that underestimate the dishonesty
          with which this subject is still dealt in Protestant pulpits; in
          what a clumsy fashion the preacher takes advantage of his security
          from interruption; how the Bible is pinched and squeezed; and how
          the people are made acquainted with every form ofthe art of false
          reading.When all is said
          and done, however, what can be expected from the effects of a
          religion which, during the centuries when it was being firmly
          established, enacted that huge philological farce concerning the
          Old Testament? I refer to that attempt to tear the Old Testament
          from the hands of the Jews under the pretext that it contained only
          Christian doctrines andbelongedto the Christians as the
          true people of Israel, while the Jews had merely arrogated it to
          themselves without authority. This was followed by a mania of
          would-be interpretation and falsification, which could not under
          any circumstances have been allied with a good conscience. However
          strongly Jewish savants protested, it was everywhere sedulously
          asserted that the Old Testament alluded everywhere to Christ, and
          nothing but Christ, more especially His Cross, and thus, wherever
          reference was made to wood, a rod, a ladder, a twig, a tree, a
          willow, or a staff, such a reference could not but be a prophecy
          relating to the wood of the Cross: even the setting-up[pg 086]of the Unicorn and the Brazen Serpent,
          even Moses stretching forth his hands in prayer—yea, the very spits
          on which the Easter lambs were roasted: all these were allusions to
          the Cross, and, as it were, preludes to it! Did any one who kept on
          asserting these things everbelievein them? Let it not be
          forgotten that the Church did not shrink from putting
          interpolations in the text of the Septuagint (e.g.Ps. xcvi. 10), in order that she might later on make use of these
          interpolated passages as Christian prophecies. They were engaged in
          a struggle, and thought of their foes rather than of honesty.85.Subtlety in
          Penury.—Take care not to laugh at the mythology of
          the Greeks merely because it so little resembles your own profound
          metaphysics! You should admire a people who checked their quick
          intellect at this point, and for a long time afterwards had tact
          enough to avoid the danger of scholasticism and hair-splitting
          superstition.86.The Christian
          Interpreters of the Body.—Whatever originates in the
          stomach, the intestines, the beating of the heart, the nerves, the
          bile, the seed—all those indispositions, debilities, irritations,
          and the whole contingency of that machine about which we know so
          little—a Christian like Pascal considers it all as a moral and
          religious phenomenon, asking himself whether God or the[pg 087]devil, good or evil,
          salvation or damnation, is the cause. Alas for the unfortunate
          interpreter! How he must distort and worry his system! How he must
          distort and worry himself in order to gain his point!87.The Moral
          Miracle.—In the domain of morality, Christianity
          knows of nothing but the miracle; the sudden change in all
          valuations, the sudden renouncement of all habits, the sudden and
          irresistible predilection for new things and persons. Christianity
          looks upon this phenomenon as the work of God, and calls it the act
          of regeneration, thus giving it a unique and incomparable value.
          Everything else which is called morality, and which bears no
          relation to this miracle, becomes in consequence a matter of
          indifference to the Christian, and indeed, so far as it is a
          feeling of well-being and pride, an object of fear. The canon of
          virtue, of the fulfilled law, is established in the New Testament,
          but in such a way as to be the canon ofimpossible
          virtue: men who still aspire to moral perfections must
          come to understand, in the face of this canon, that they are
          further and furtherremovedfrom their aim; they mustdespairof virtue, and end by
          throwing themselves at the feet of the Merciful One.It is only in
          reaching a conclusion like this that moral efforts on the part of
          the Christian can still be regarded as possessing any value: the
          condition that these efforts shall always remain sterile, painful,
          and melancholy is therefore indispensable; and it[pg 088]is in this way that those efforts could
          still avail to bring about that moment of ecstasy when man
          experiences the“overflow of grace”and the moral miracle. This struggle for morality is, however, notnecessary; for it is by no means
          uncommon for this miracle to happen to the sinner at the very
          moment when he is, so to speak, wallowing in the mire of sin: yea,
          the leap from the deepest and most abandoned sinfulness into its
          contrary seems easier, and, as a clear proof of the miracle, even
          more desirable.What, for the
          rest, may be the signification of such a sudden, unreasonable, and
          irresistible revolution, such a change from the depths of misery
          into the heights of happiness? (might it be a disguised epilepsy?)
          This should at all events be considered by alienists, who have
          frequent opportunities of observing similar“miracles”—for example, the mania of murder or
          suicide. The relatively“more pleasant
          consequences”in the case of the Christian make no important
          difference.88.Luther, the
          Great Benefactor.—Luther's most important result is
          the suspicion which he awakened against the saints and the entire
          Christianvita
          contemplativa; only since his day has an un-Christianvita contemplativaagain become
          possible in Europe, only since then has contempt for laymen and
          worldly activity ceased. Luther continued to be an honest miner's
          son even after he had been shut up in a monastery, and there, for
          lack of other[pg
          089]depths and“borings,”he descended
          into himself, and bored terrifying and dark passages through his
          own depths—finally coming to recognise that an introspective and
          saintly life was impossible to him, and that his innate“activity”in body and soul would
          end by being his ruin. For a long time, too long, indeed, he
          endeavoured to find the way to holiness through castigations; but
          at length he made up his mind, and said to himself:“There is no realvita contemplativa! We have been
          deceived. The saints were no better than the rest of us.”This was truly a rustic way of gaining one's case; but for the
          Germans of that period it was the only proper way. How edified they
          felt when they could read in their Lutheran catechism:“Apart from the Ten Commandments there is no work which
          could find favour in the eyes of God—these much-boasted spiritual
          works of the saints are purely imaginary!”89.Doubt As
          Sin.—Christianity has done all it possibly could to
          draw a circle round itself, and has even gone so far as to declare
          doubt itself to be a sin. We are to be precipitated into faith by a
          miracle, without the help of reason, after which we are to float in
          it as the clearest and least equivocal of elements—a mere glance at
          some solid ground, the thought that we exist for some purpose other
          than floating, the least movement of our amphibious nature: all
          this is a sin! Let it be noted that, following this decision, the
          proofs and demonstration of the faith, and all meditations upon its
          origin,[pg
          090]are prohibited as sinful. Christianity wants blindness and frenzy
          and an eternal swan-song above the waves under which reason has
          been drowned!90.EgoismversusEgoism.—How
          many are there who still come to the conclusion:“Life would be intolerable were there no God!”Or, as is said in idealistic circles:“Life
          would be intolerable if its ethical signification were
          lacking.”Hence there must be a God—or an ethical
          signification of existence! In reality the case stands thus: He who
          is accustomed to conceptions of this sort does not desire a life
          without them, hence these conceptions are necessary for him and his
          preservation—but what a presumption it is to assert that everything
          necessary for my preservation must existin
          reality! As if my preservation were really necessary!
          What if others held the contrary opinion? if they did not care to
          live under the conditions of these two articles of faith, and did
          not regard life as worth living if they were realised!—And that is
          the present position of affairs.91.The Honesty of
          God.—An omniscient and omnipotent God who does not
          even take care that His intentions shall be understood by His
          creatures—could He be a God of goodness? A God, who, for thousands
          of years, has permitted innumerable doubts and scruples to continue
          unchecked as if they were of no importance in the salvation of
          mankind,[pg
          091]and who, nevertheless, announces the most dreadful consequences for
          any one who mistakes his truth? Would he not be a cruel god if,
          being himself in possession of the truth, he could calmly
          contemplate mankind, in a state of miserable torment, worrying its
          mind as to what was truth?Perhaps,
          however, he really is a God of goodness, and was unable to express
          Himself more clearly? Perhaps he lacked intelligence enough for
          this? Or eloquence? All the worse! For in such a case he may have
          been deceived himself in regard to what he calls his“truth,”and may not be far from being another“poor, deceived devil!”Must he not
          therefore experience all the torments of hell at seeing His
          creatures suffering so much here below—and even more, suffering
          through all eternity—when he himself can neither advise nor help
          them, except as a deaf and dumb person, who makes all kinds of
          equivocal signs when his child or his dog is threatened with the
          most fearful danger? A distressed believer who argues thus might be
          pardoned if his pity for the suffering God were greater than his
          pity for his“neighbours”; for they
          are his neighbours no longer if that most solitary and primeval
          being is also the greatest sufferer and stands most in need of
          consolation.Every religion
          shows some traits of the fact that it owes its origin to a state of
          human intellectuality which was as yet too young and immature: they
          all make light of the necessity for speaking the truth: as yet they
          know nothing of theduty of God, the duty of being
          clear and truthful in His communications with men. No one was more[pg 092]eloquent than Pascal
          in speaking of the“hidden God”and
          the reasons why He had to keep Himself hidden, all of which
          indicates clearly enough that Pascal himself could never make his
          mind easy on this point: but he speaks with such confidence that
          one is led to imagine that he must have been let into the secret at
          some time or other. He seemed to have some idea that thedeus absconditusbore a few
          slight traces of immorality; and he felt too much ashamed and
          afraid of acknowledging this to himself: consequently, like a man
          who is afraid, he spoke as loudly as he could.92.At the
          Death-bed of Christianity.—All truly active men now
          do without inward Christianity, and the most moderate and
          thoughtful men of the intellectual middle classes possess only a
          kind of modified Christianity; that is, a peculiarly simplified
          Christianity. A God who, in his love, ordains everything so that it
          may be best for us, a God who gives us our virtue and our happiness
          and then takes them away from us, so that everything at length goes
          on smoothly and there is no reason left why we should take life ill
          or grumble about it: in short, resignation and modesty raised to
          the rank of divinities—that is the best and most lifelike remnant
          of Christianity now left to us. It must be remembered, however,
          that in this way Christianity has developed into a softmoralism: instead of“God, freedom, and immortality,”we have now a
          kind of benevolence and honest sentiments, and the belief that, in
          the entire universe, benevolence[pg 093]and honest sentiments will finally prevail:
          this is the euthanasia of Christianity.93.What is
          Truth?—Who will not be pleased with the conclusions
          which the faithful take such delight in coming to?—“Science cannot be true; for it denies God. Hence it
          does not come from God; and consequently it cannot be true—for God
          is truth.”It is not the deduction but the premise which is
          fallacious. What if God were not exactly truth, and if this were
          proved? And if he were instead the vanity, the desire for power,
          the ambitions, the fear, and the enraptured and terrified folly of
          mankind?94.Remedy for the
          Displeased.—Even Paul already believed that some
          sacrifice was necessary to take away the deep displeasure which God
          experienced concerning sin: and ever since then Christians have
          never ceased to vent the ill-humour which they felt with themselves
          upon some victim or another—whether it was“the world,”or“history,”or“reason,”or joy, or the tranquillity of other
          men—something good, no matter what, had to die fortheirsins (even if onlyin effigie)!95.The Historical
          Refutation as the Decisive One.—Formerly it was
          sought to prove that there was no God—now it is shown how the
          belief that a God existed could haveoriginated,[pg 094]and by what means this belief gained
          authority and importance: in this way the counterproof that there
          is no God becomes unnecessary and superfluous.—In former times,
          when the“evidences of the existence of
          God”which had been brought forward were refuted, a doubt
          still remained, viz. whether better proofs could not be found than
          those which had just been refuted: at that time the atheists did
          not understand the art of making atabula rasa.