96.“In hoc signo
          vinces.”—To whatever degree of progress Europe
          may have attained in other respects, where religious affairs are
          concerned it has not yet reached the liberal naïveté of the ancient
          Brahmins, which proves that, in India, four thousand years ago,
          people meditated more profoundly and transmitted to their
          descendants more pleasure in meditating than is the case in our own
          days. For those Brahmins believed in the first place that the
          priests were more powerful than the gods, and in the second place
          that it was observances which constituted the power of the priests:
          as a result of which their poets were never tired of glorifying
          those observances (prayers, ceremonies, sacrifices, chants,
          improvised melodies) as the real dispensers of all benefits.
          Although a certain amount of superstition and poetry was mingled
          with all this, the principles weretrue! A
          step further, and the gods were cast aside—which Europe likewise
          will have to do before very long! One more step further, and
          priests and intermediaries[pg 095]could also be dispensed with—and then Buddha,
          the teacher of the religion of self-redemption, appeared. How far
          Europe is still removed from this degree of culture! When at length
          all the customs and observances, upon which rests the power of
          gods, priests, and saviours, shall have been destroyed, when as a
          consequence morality, in the old sense, will be dead, then there
          will come ... yea, what will come then? But let us refrain from
          speculating; let us rather make certain that Europe will retrieve
          that which, in India, amidst this people of thinkers, was carried
          out thousands of years ago as a commandment of thought!Scattered among
          the different nations of Europe there are now from ten to twenty
          millions of men who no longer“believe in
          God”—is it too much to ask that they should give each other
          some indication or password? As soon as they recognise each other
          in this way, they will also make themselves known to each other;
          and they will immediately become a power in Europe, and, happily, a
          poweramongthe nations! among the
          classes! between rich and poor! between those who command, and
          those who obey! between the most restless and the most tranquil,
          tranquillising people!