Book II.97.One becomes
          Moral—but not because one is moral! Submission to
          morals may be due to slavishness or vanity, egoism or resignation,
          dismal fanaticism or thoughtlessness. It may, again, be an act of
          despair, such as submission to the authority of a ruler; but there
          is nothing moral about itper
          se.98.Alterations in
          Morals.—Morals are constantly undergoing changes and
          transformations, occasioned by successful crimes. (To these, for
          example, belong all innovations in moral judgments.)99.Wherein we are
          all Irrational.—We still continue to draw conclusions
          from judgments which we consider as false, or doctrines in which we
          no longer believe,—through our feelings.100.Awaking from a
          Dream.—Noble and wise men once upon a time believed
          in the music of the[pg
          098]spheres; there are still noble and wise men who believe in“the moral significance of
          existence,”but there will come a day when this music of the
          spheres also will no longer be audible to them. They will awake and
          perceive that their ears have been dreaming.101.Open to
          Doubt.—To accept a belief simply because it is
          customary implies that one is dishonest, cowardly, and lazy.—Must
          dishonesty, cowardice, and laziness, therefore, be the primary
          conditions of morality?102.The most
          Ancient Moral Judgments.—What attitude do we assume
          towards the acts of our neighbour?—In the first place, we consider
          how they may benefit ourselves—we see them only in this light. It
          is this effect which we regard as the intention of the acts,—and in
          the end we come to look upon these intentions of our neighbour as
          permanent qualities in him, and we call him, for example,“a dangerous man.”Triple error!
          Triple and most ancient mistake! Perhaps this inheritance comes to
          us from the animals and their faculty of judgment! Must not the
          origin of all morality be sought in these detestable narrow-minded
          conclusions:“Whatever injures me is evil
          (something injurious in itself), whatever benefits me is good
          (beneficial and profitable in itself), whatever injures me once or
          several times is hostileper
          se; whatever benefits me once or several times is[pg 099]friendlyper se.”O pudenda
          origo!Is not this equivalent to interpreting the
          contemptible, occasional, and often merely accidental relations of
          another person to us as his primary and most essential qualities,
          and affirming that towards himself and every one else he is only
          capable of such actions as we ourselves have experienced at his
          hands once or several times! And is not this thorough folly based
          upon the most immodest of all mental reservations: namely, that we
          ourselves must be the standard of what is good, since we determine
          good and evil?103.There are Two
          Classes of People who deny Morality.—To deny morality
          may mean, in the first place, to deny the moral inducements which,
          men pretend, have urged them on to their actions,—which is
          equivalent to saying that morality merely consists of words and
          forms, part of that coarse and subtle deceit (especially
          self-deceit) which is characteristic of mankind, and perhaps more
          especially of those men who are celebrated for their virtues. In
          the second place, it may mean our denying that moral judgments are
          founded on truths. It is admitted in such a case that these
          judgments are, in fact, the motives of the actions, but that in
          this way it is really errors as the basis of all moral judgments
          which urge men on to their moral actions. This is my point of view;
          but I should be far from denying that in very many cases a subtle
          suspicion in accordance with the former point of view—i.e.in
          the spirit of La Rochefoucauld—is[pg 100]also justifiable, and in any case of a high
          general utility.—Therefore I deny morality in the same way as I
          deny alchemy,i.e.I deny its hypotheses; but
          I do not deny that there have been alchemists who believed in these
          hypotheses and based their actions upon them. I also deny
          immorality—not that innumerable people feel immoral, but that there
          is any true reason why they should feel so. I should not, of
          course, deny—unless I were a fool—that many actions which are
          called immoral should be avoided and resisted; and in the same way
          that many which are called moral should be performed and
          encouraged; but I hold that in both cases these actions should be
          performed from motives other than those which have prevailed up to
          the present time. We must learn anew in order that at last, perhaps
          very late in the day, we may be able to do something more: feel
          anew.104.Our
          Valuations.—All actions may be referred back to
          valuations, and all valuations are either one's own or adopted, the
          latter being by far the more numerous. Why do we adopt them?
          Through fear,i.e.we think it more advisable
          to pretend that they are our own, and so well do we accustom
          ourselves to do so that it at last becomes second nature to us. A
          valuation of our own, which is the appreciation of a thing in
          accordance with the pleasure or displeasure it causes us and no one
          else, is something very rare indeed!—But must not our valuation of
          our neighbour—which[pg
          101]is prompted by the motive that we adopt his valuation in most
          cases—proceed from ourselves and by our own decision? Of course,
          but then we come to these decisions during our childhood, and
          seldom change them. We often remain during our whole lifetime the
          dupes of our childish and accustomed judgments in our manner of
          judging our fellow-men (their minds, rank, morality, character, and
          reprehensibility), and we find it necessary to subscribe to their
          valuations.105.Pseudo-egoism.—The great
          majority of people, whatever they may think and say about their“egoism,”do nothing for their ego
          all their life long, but only for a phantom of this ego which has
          been formed in regard to them by their friends and communicated to
          them. As a consequence, they all live in a haze of impersonal and
          half-personal opinions and of arbitrary and, as it were, poetic
          valuations: the one always in the head of another, and this head,
          again, in the head of somebody else—a queer world of phantoms which
          manages to give itself a rational appearance! This haze of opinions
          and habits grows in extent and lives almost independently of the
          people it surrounds; it is it which gives rise to the immense
          effect of general judgments on“man”—all those men, who do not know themselves,
          believe in a bloodless abstraction which they call“man,”i.e.in a fiction; and every
          change caused in this abstraction by the judgments of powerful
          individualities[pg
          102](such as princes and philosophers) produces an extraordinary and
          irrational effect on the great majority,—for the simple reason that
          not a single individual in this haze can oppose a real ego, an ego
          which is accessible to and fathomed by himself, to the universal
          pale fiction, which he could thereby destroy.106.Against
          Definitions of Moral Aims.—On all sides we now hear
          the aim of morals defined as the preservation and advancement of
          humanity; but this is merely the expression of a wish to have a
          formula and nothing more. Preservation wherein? advancement
          whither? These are questions which must at once be asked. Is not
          the most essential point, the answer to thiswherein?andwhither?left out of the formula?
          What results therefrom, so far as our own actions and duties are
          concerned, which is not already tacitly and instinctively
          understood? Can we sufficiently understand from this formula
          whether we must prolong as far as possible the existence of the
          human race, or bring about the greatest possible disanimalisation
          of man? How different the means,i.e.the practical morals, would have to be in the two cases! Supposing
          that the greatest possible rationality were given to mankind, this
          certainly would not guarantee the longest possible existence for
          them! Or supposing that their“greatest
          happiness”was thought to be the answer to the questions
          put, do we thereby mean the highest degree of happiness which a few
          individuals[pg
          103]might attain, or an incalculable, though finally attainable,
          average state of happiness for all? And why should morality be the
          way to it? Has not morality, considered as a whole, opened up so
          many sources of displeasure as to lead us to think that man up to
          the present, with every new refinement of morality, has become more
          and more discontented with himself, with his neighbour, and with
          his own lot? Has not the most moral of men hitherto believed that
          the only justifiable state of mankind in the face of morals is that
          of the deepest misery?107.Our Right to
          our Folly.—How must we act? Why must we act? So far
          as the coarse and immediate needs of the individual are concerned,
          it is easy to answer these questions, but the more we enter upon
          the more important and more subtle domains of action, the more does
          the problem become uncertain and the more arbitrary its solution.
          An arbitrary decision, however, is the very thing that must be
          excluded here,—thus commands the authority of morals: an obscure
          uneasiness and awe must relentlessly guide man in those very
          actions the objects and means of which he cannot at once perceive.
          This authority of morals undermines our thinking faculty in regard
          to those things concerning which it might be dangerous to think
          wrongly,—it is in this way, at all events, that morality usually
          justifies itself to its accusers. Wrong in this place means
          dangerous; but dangerous to whom? It[pg 104]is not, as a rule, the danger of the doer of
          the action which the supporters of authoritative morals have in
          view, but their own danger; the loss which their power and
          influence might undergo if the right to act according to their own
          greater or lesser reason, however wilfully and foolishly, were
          accorded to all men. They on their part make unhesitating use of
          their right to arbitrariness and folly,—they even command in cases
          where it is hardly possible, or at all events very difficult, to
          answer the questions,“How must they act,
          why must they act?”And if the reason of mankind grows with
          such extraordinary slowness that it was often possible to deny its
          growth during the whole course of humanity, what is more to blame
          for this than this solemn presence, even omnipresence, of moral
          commands, which do not even permit the individual question of how
          and why to be asked at all? Have we not been educated precisely in
          such a way as to make us feel pathetic, and thus to obscure our
          vision at the very time when our reason should be able to see as
          clearly and calmly as possible—i.e.in
          all higher and more important circumstances?108.Some
          Theses.—We should not give the individual, in so far
          as he desires his own happiness, any precepts or recommendations as
          to the road leading to happiness; for individual happiness arises
          from particular laws that are unknown to anybody, and such a man
          will only be hindered or obstructed by recommendations which come
          to him from outside[pg
          105]sources. Those precepts which are called moral are in reality
          directed against individuals, and do not by any means make for the
          happiness of such individuals. The relationship of these precepts
          to the "happiness and well-being of mankind" is equally slight, for
          it is quite impossible to assign a definite conception to these
          words, and still less can they be employed as guiding stars on the
          dark sea of moral aspirations. It is a prejudice to think that
          morality is more favourable to the development of the reason than
          immorality. It is erroneous to suppose that the unconscious aim in
          the development of every conscious being (namely, animal, man,
          humanity, etc.) is its“greatest
          happiness”: on the contrary, there is a particular and
          incomparable happiness to be attained at every stage of our
          development, one that is neither high nor low, but quite an
          individual happiness. Evolution does not make happiness its goal;
          it aims merely at evolution, and nothing else. It is only if
          humanity had a universally recognised goal that we could propose to
          do this or that: for the time being there is no such goal. It
          follows that the pretensions of morality should not be brought into
          any relationship with mankind: this would be merely childish and
          irrational. It is quite another thing to recommend a goal to
          mankind: this goal would then be something that would depend upon
          our own will and pleasure. Provided that mankind in general agreed
          to adopt such a goal, it could then impose a moral law upon itself,
          a law which would, at all events, be imposed by their own free
          will. Up to now, however, the moral law has had to be placed[pg 106]above our own free
          will: strictly speaking, men did not wish to impose this law upon
          themselves; they wished to take it from somewhere, to discover it,
          or to let themselves be commanded by it from somewhere.109.Self-control
          and Moderation, and their Final Motive.—I find not
          more than six essentially different methods for combating the
          vehemence of an impulse. First of all, we may avoid the occasion
          for satisfying the impulse, weakening and mortifying it by
          refraining from satisfying it for long and ever-lengthening
          periods. Secondly, we may impose a severe and regular order upon
          ourselves in regard to the satisfying of our appetites. By thus
          regulating the impulse and limiting its ebb and flow to fixed
          periods, we may obtain intervals in which it ceases to disturb us;
          and by beginning in this way we may perhaps be able to pass on to
          the first method. In the third place, we may deliberately give
          ourselves over to an unrestrained and unbounded gratification of
          the impulse in order that we may become disgusted with it, and to
          obtain by means of this very disgust a command over the impulse:
          provided, of course, that we do not imitate the rider who rides his
          horse to death and breaks his own neck in doing so. For this,
          unhappily, is generally the outcome of the application of this
          third method.In the fourth
          place, there is an intellectual trick, which consists in
          associating the idea of the gratification[pg 107]so firmly with some painful thought, that
          after a little practice the thought of gratification is itself
          immediately felt as a very painful one. (For example, when the
          Christian accustoms himself to think of the presence and scorn of
          the devil in the course of sensual enjoyment, or everlasting
          punishment in hell for revenge by murder; or even merely of the
          contempt which he will meet with from those of his fellow-men whom
          he most respects, if he steals a sum of money, or if a man has
          often checked an intense desire for suicide by thinking of the
          grief and self-reproaches of his relations and friends, and has
          thus succeeded in balancing himself upon the edge of life: for,
          after some practice, these ideas follow one another in his mind
          like cause and effect.) Among instances of this kind may be
          mentioned the cases of Lord Byron and Napoleon, in whom the pride
          of man revolted and took offence at the preponderance of one
          particular passion over the collective attitude and order of
          reason. From this arises the habit and joy of tyrannising over the
          craving and making it, as it were, gnash its teeth.“I will not be a slave of any appetite,”wrote
          Byron in his diary. In the fifth place, we may bring about a
          dislocation of our powers by imposing upon ourselves a particularly
          difficult and fatiguing task, or by deliberately submitting to some
          new charm and pleasure in order thus to turn our thoughts and
          physical powers into other channels. It comes to the same thing if
          we temporarily favour another impulse by affording it numerous
          opportunities of gratification, and thus rendering it the
          squanderer of the power which would otherwise be commandeered,[pg 108]so to speak, by the
          tyrannical impulse. A few, perhaps, will be able to restrain the
          particular passion which aspires to domination by granting their
          other known passions a temporary encouragement and license in order
          that they may devour the food which the tyrant wishes for himself
          alone.In the sixth and
          last place, the man who can stand it, and thinks it reasonable to
          weaken and subdue his entire physical and psychical organisation,
          likewise, of course, attains the goal of weakening a single violent
          instinct; as, for example, those who starve their sensuality and at
          the same time their vigour, and often destroy their reason into the
          bargain, such as the ascetics.—Hence, shunning the opportunities,
          regulating the impulse, bringing about satiety and disgust in the
          impulse, associating a painful idea (such as that of discredit,
          disgust, or offended pride), then the dislocation of one's forces,
          and finally general debility and exhaustion: these are the six
          methods. But the will to combat the violence of a craving is beyond
          our power, equally with the method we adopt and the success we may
          have in applying it. In all this process our intellect is rather
          merely the blind instrument of another rival craving, whether it be
          the impulse to repose, or the fear of disgrace and other evil
          consequences, or love. While“we”thus imagine that we are complaining of the violence of an impulse,
          it is at bottom merely one impulse which is complaining of another,i.e.the perception of the
          violent suffering which is being caused us presupposes that there
          is another equally or more violent impulse, and that a struggle[pg 109]is impending in
          which our intellect must take part.110.That which
          Opposes.—We may observe the following process in
          ourselves, and I should like it to be often observed and confirmed.
          There arises in us the scent of a kind of pleasure hitherto unknown
          to us, and consequently a new craving. Now, the question is, What
          opposes itself to this craving? If it be things and considerations
          of a common kind, or people whom we hold in no very high esteem,
          the aim of the new craving assumes the appearance of a“noble, good, praiseworthy feeling, and one worthy of
          sacrifice”: all the moral dispositions which have been
          inherited will adopt it and will add it to the number of those aims
          which we consider as moral—and now we imagine that we are no longer
          striving after a pleasure, but after a morality, which greatly
          increases our confidence in our aspirations.111.To the Admirers
          of Objectiveness.—He who, as a child, has observed in
          his parents and acquaintances in the midst of whom he has grown up,
          certain varied and strong feelings, with but little subtle
          discernment and inclination for intellectual justice, and has
          therefore employed his best powers and his most precious time in
          imitating these feelings, will observe in himself when he arrives
          at years of discretion that every new thing or man he meets with
          excites in him either sympathy or[pg 110]aversion, envy or contempt. Under the
          domination of this experience, which he is powerless to shake off,
          he admires neutrality of feeling or“objectivity”as an extraordinary thing, as
          something connected with genius or a very rare morality, and he
          cannot believe that even this neutrality is merely the product of
          education and habit.112.On the Natural
          History of Duty and Right.—Our duties are the claims
          which others have upon us. How did they acquire these claims? By
          the fact that they considered us as capable of making and holding
          agreements and contracts, by assuming that we were their like and
          equals, and by consequently entrusting something to us, bringing us
          up, educating us, and supporting us. We do our duty,i.e.we
          justify that conception of our power for the sake of which all
          these things were done for us. We return them in proportion as they
          were meted out to us. It is thus our pride that orders us to do our
          duty—we desire to re-establish our own independence by opposing to
          that which others have done for us something that we do for them,
          for in that way the others invade our sphere of power, and would
          for ever have a hand in it if we did not make reprisals by means of“duty,”and thus encroach upon their
          power. The rights of others can only have regard to that which lies
          within our power; it would be unreasonable on their part to require
          something from us which does not belong to us. To put the matter
          more[pg 111]accurately, their
          rights can only relate to what they imagine to be in our power,
          provided that it is something that we ourselves consider as being
          in our power. The same error may easily occur on either side. The
          feeling of duty depends upon our having the same belief in regard
          to the extent of our power as other people have,i.e.that we can promise certain things and undertake to do them freely
          (“free will”).My rights
          consist of that part of my power which others have not only
          conceded to me, but which they wish to maintain for me. Why do they
          do it? On the one hand they are actuated by wisdom, fear and
          prudence: whether they expect something similar from us (the
          protection of their rights), whether they consider a struggle with
          us as dangerous or inopportune, or whether they see a disadvantage
          to themselves in every diminution of our power, since in that case
          we should be ill adapted for an alliance with them against a
          hostile third power. On the other hand rights are granted by
          donations and cessions. In this latter case, the other people have
          not only enough power, but more than enough, so that they can give
          up a portion and guarantee it to the person to whom they give it:
          whereby they presuppose a certain restricted sense of power in the
          person upon whom they have bestowed the gift. In this way rights
          arise: recognised and guaranteed degrees of power. When the
          relations of powers to one another are materially changed, rights
          disappear and new ones are formed, as is demonstrated by the
          constant flux and reflux of the rights of nations. When our power
          diminishes[pg
          112]to any great extent, the feelings of those who hitherto guaranteed
          it undergo some change: they consider whether they shall once again
          restore us to our former possession, and if they do not see their
          way to do this they deny our“rights”from that time forward. In the same
          way, if our power increases to a considerable extent the feelings
          of those who previously recognised it, and whose recognition we no
          longer require, likewise change: they will then try to reduce our
          power to its former dimensions, and they will endeavour to
          interfere in our affairs, justifying their interference by an
          appeal to their“duty.”But this is
          merely useless word-quibbling. Where right prevails, a certain
          state and degree of power is maintained, and all attempts at its
          augmentation and diminution are resisted. The right of others is
          the concession of our feeling of power to the feeling of power in
          these others. Whenever our power shows itself to be thoroughly
          shattered and broken, our rights cease: on the other hand, when we
          have become very much stronger, the rights of others cease in our
          minds to be what we have hitherto admitted them to be. The man who
          aims at being just, therefore, must keep a constant lookout for the
          changes in the indicator of the scales in order that he may
          properly estimate the degrees of power and right which, with the
          customary transitoriness of human things, retain their equilibrium
          for only a short time and in most cases continue to rise and fall.
          As a consequence it is thus very difficult to be“just,”and requires much experience, good
          intentions, and an unusually large amount of good sense.[pg 113]113.Striving for
          Distinction.—When we strive after distinction we must
          ceaselessly keep our eyes fixed on our neighbour and endeavour to
          ascertain what his feelings are; but the sympathy and knowledge
          which are necessary to satisfy this desire are far from being
          inspired by harmlessness, compassion, or kindness. On the contrary,
          we wish to perceive or find out in what way our neighbour suffers
          from us, either internally or externally, how he loses control over
          himself and yields to the impression which our hand or even our
          mere appearance makes on him. Even when he who aspires to
          distinction makes or wishes to make a joyful, elevating, or
          cheerful impression, he does not enjoy this success in that he
          rejoices, exalts, or cheers his neighbour, but in that he leaves
          his impress on the latter's soul, changing its form and dominating
          it according to his will. The desire for distinction is the desire
          to subject one's neighbour, even if it be merely in an indirect
          fashion, one only felt or even only dreamt of. There is a long
          series of stages in this secretly-desired will to subdue, and a
          very complete record of them would perhaps almost be like an
          excellent history of culture from the early distortions of
          barbarism down to the caricatures of modern over-refinement and
          sickly idealism.This desire for
          distinction entails upon our neighbour—to indicate only a few rungs
          of the long ladder—torture first of all, followed by blows, then
          terror, anxious surprise, wonder, envy, admiration,[pg 114]elevation, pleasure, joy, laughter,
          derision, mockery, sneers, scourging and self-inflicted torture.
          There at the very top of the ladder stands the ascetic and martyr,
          who himself experiences the utmost satisfaction, because he
          inflicts on himself, as a result of his desire for distinction,
          that pain which his opposite, the barbarian on the first rung of
          the ladder, inflicts upon those others, upon whom and before whom
          he wishes to distinguish himself. The triumph of the ascetic over
          himself, his introspective glance, which beholds a man split up
          into a sufferer and a spectator, and which henceforth never looks
          at the outside world but to gather from it, as it were, wood for
          his own funeral pyre: this final tragedy of the desire for
          distinction which shows us only one person who, so to speak, is
          consumed internally—that is an end worthy of the beginning: in both
          cases there is an inexpressible happiness at the sight of torture;
          indeed, happiness considered as a feeling of power developed to the
          utmost, has perhaps never reached a higher pitch of perfection on
          earth than in the souls of superstitious ascetics. This is
          expressed by the Brahmins in the story of King Visvamitra, who
          obtained so much strength by thousands of years of penance that he
          undertook to construct a new heaven. I believe that in the entire
          category of inward experiences the people of our time are mere
          novices and clumsy guessers who“try to
          have a shot at it”: four thousand years ago much more was
          known about these execrable refinements of self-enjoyment. Perhaps
          at that time the creation of the world was imagined by some Hindu
          dreamer[pg
          115]to have been an ascetic operation which a god took upon himself!
          Perhaps this god may have wished to join himself to a mobile nature
          as an instrument of torture in order thus to feel his happiness and
          power doubled! And even supposing him to have been a god of love:
          what a delight it would have been for him to create a suffering
          mankind in order that he himself might suffer divinely and
          super-humanly from the sight of the continual torture of his
          creatures, and thus to tyrannise over himself! And, again,
          supposing him to have been not only a god of love, but also a god
          of holiness, we can scarcely conceive the ecstasies of this divine
          ascetic while creating sins and sinners and eternal punishment, and
          an immense place of eternal torture below his throne where there is
          a continual weeping and wailing and gnashing of teeth!It is not by any
          means impossible that the soul of a St. Paul, a Dante, or a Calvin,
          and people like them, may once have penetrated into the terrifying
          secrets of such voluptuousness of power, and in view of such souls
          we may well ask whether the circle of this desire for distinction
          has come to a close with the ascetic. Might it not be possible for
          the course of this circle to be traversed a second time, by uniting
          the fundamental idea of the ascetic, and at the same time that of a
          compassionate Deity? In other words, pain would be given to others
          in order that pain might be given to one's self, so that in this
          way one could triumph over one's self and one's pity to enjoy the
          extreme voluptuousness of power.—Forgive me these digressions,
          which come to my mind when I think[pg 116]of all the possibilities in the vast domain
          of psychical debaucheries to which one may be led by the desire for
          power!114.On the
          Knowledge of the Sufferer.—The state of sick men who
          have suffered long and terribly from the torture inflicted upon
          them by their illness, and whose reason has nevertheless not been
          in any way affected, is not without a certain amount of value in
          our search for knowledge—quite apart from the intellectual benefits
          which follow upon every profound solitude and every sudden and
          justified liberation from duties and habits. The man who suffers
          severely looks forth with terrible calmness from his state of
          suffering upon outside things: all those little lying enchantments,
          by which things are usually surrounded when seen through the eye of
          a healthy person, have vanished from the sufferer; his own life
          even lies there before him, stripped of all bloom and colour. If by
          chance it has happened that up to then he has lived in some kind of
          dangerous fantasy, this extreme disenchantment through pain is the
          means, and possibly the only means, of extricating him from it. (It
          is possible that this is what happened to the Founder of
          Christianity when suspended from the Cross; for the bitterest words
          ever pronounced,“My God, My God, why hast
          Thou forsaken Me?”if understood in their deepest sense, as
          they ought to be understood, contain the evidence of a complete
          disillusionment and enlightenment[pg 117]in regard to the deceptions of life: in that
          moment of supreme suffering Christ obtained a clear insight into
          Himself, just as in the poet's narrative did the poor dying Don
          Quixote.)The formidable
          tension of the intellect that wishes to hold its own against pain
          shows everything that one now looks upon in a new light, and the
          inexpressible charm of this new light is often powerful enough to
          withstand all the seductiveness of suicide and to make the
          continuation of life seem very desirable to the sufferer. His mind
          scornfully turns to the warm and comfortable dream-world in which
          the healthy man moves about thoughtlessly, and he thinks with
          contempt of the noblest and most cherished illusions in which he
          formerly indulged. He experiences delight in conjuring up this
          contempt as if from the depths of hell, and thus inflicting the
          bitterest sufferings upon his soul: it is by this counterpoise that
          he bears up against physical suffering—he feels that such a
          counterpoise is now essential! In one terrible moment of
          clear-sightedness he says to himself,“Be
          for once thine own accuser and hangman; for once regard thy
          suffering as a punishment which thou hast inflicted on thyself!
          Enjoy thy superiority as a judge: better still, enjoy thine own
          will and pleasure, thy tyrannical arbitrariness! Raise thyself
          above thy life as above thy suffering, and look down into the depth
          of reason and unreason!”Our pride
          revolts as it never did before, it experiences an incomparable
          charm in defending life against such a tyrant as suffering and
          against all the insinuations of this tyrant, who would fain urge[pg 118]us to give evidence
          against life,—we are taking the part of life in the face of this
          tyrant. In this state of mind we take up a bitter stand against all
          pessimism in order that it may not appear to be a consequence of
          our condition, and thus humiliate us as conquered ones. The charm
          of being just in our judgments was also never greater than now; for
          now this justice is a triumph over ourselves and over so irritated
          a state of mind that unfairness of judgment might be excused,—but
          we will not be excused, it is now, if ever, that we wish to show
          that we need no excuse. We pass through downright orgies of
          pride.And now appears
          the first ray of relief, of recovery, and one of its first effects
          is that we turn against the preponderance of our pride: we call
          ourselves foolish and vain, as if we had undergone some unique
          experience. We humiliate ungratefully this all-powerful pride, the
          aid of which enabled us to endure the pain we suffered, and we call
          vehemently for some antidote for this pride: we wish to become
          strangers to ourselves and to be freed from our own person after
          pain has forcibly made us personal too long.“Away with this pride,”we cry,“it was only another illness and convulsion!”Once more we look longingly at men and nature and recollect with a
          sorrowful smile that now since the veil has fallen we regard many
          things concerning them in a new and different light,—but we are
          refreshed by once more seeing the softened lights of life, and
          emerge from that fearfully dispassionate daylight in which we as
          sufferers saw things and through things. We[pg 119]do not get angry when we see the charms
          of health resume their play, and we contemplate the sight as if
          transformed, gently and still fatigued. In this state we cannot
          listen to music without weeping.115.The
          so-called“Ego.”—Language and the
          prejudices upon which language is based very often act as obstacles
          in our paths when we proceed to explore internal phenomena and
          impulses: as one example, we may instance the fact that there are
          only words to express the superlative degrees of these phenomena
          and impulses. Now, it is our habit no longer to observe accurately
          when words fail us, since it is difficult in such cases to think
          with precision: in former times, even, people involuntarily came to
          the conclusion that where the domain of words ceased, the domain of
          existence ceased also. Wrath, hatred, love, pity, desire,
          recognition, joy, pain: all these are names indicating extreme
          conditions; the milder and middle stages, and even more
          particularly the ever active lower stages, escape our attention,
          and yet it is they which weave the warp and woof of our character
          and destiny. It often happens that these extreme outbursts—and even
          the most moderate pleasure or displeasure of which we are actually
          conscious, whether in partaking of food or listening to a sound, is
          possibly, if properly estimated, merely an extreme
          outburst,—destroy the texture and are then violent exceptions, in
          most cases the consequences of some congestions,—and how easily as
          such can they[pg
          120]mislead the observer! as indeed they mislead the person acting! We
          are all of us not what we appear to be according to the conditions
          for which alone we have consciousness and words, and consequently
          praise and blame. We fail to recognise ourselves after these coarse
          outbursts which are known to ourselves alone, we draw conclusions
          from data where the exceptions prove stronger than the rules; we
          misinterpret ourselves in reading our own ego's pronouncements,
          which appeared to be so clear. But our opinion of ourselves, this
          so-called ego which we have arrived at by this wrong method,
          contributes henceforth to form our character and destiny.