116.The Unknown
          World of the“Subject.”—What men have
          found it so difficult to understand from the most ancient times
          down to the present day is their ignorance in regard to themselves,
          not merely with respect to good and evil, but something even more
          essential. The oldest of illusions lives on, namely, that we know,
          and know precisely in each case, how human action is originated.
          Not only“God who looks into the
          heart,”not only the man who acts and reflects upon his
          action, but everybody does not doubt that he understands the
          phenomena of action in every one else.“I
          know what I want and what I have done, I am free and responsible
          for my act, and I make others responsible for their acts; I can
          mention by its name every moral possibility and every internal
          movement which precedes an act,—ye may act as[pg 121]ye will, I understand myself and I
          understand you all!”Such was what every one thought once
          upon a time, and almost every one thinks so even now. Socrates and
          Plato, who in this matter were great sceptics and admirable
          innovators, were nevertheless intensely credulous in regard to that
          fatal prejudice, that profound error, which holds that“The right knowledge must necessarily be followed by
          the right action.”In holding this principle they were still
          the heirs of the universal folly and presumption that knowledge
          exists concerning the essence of an action.“It would indeed be dreadful if the comprehension of
          the essence of a right action were not followed by that right
          action itself”—this was the only manner in which these great
          men thought it necessary to demonstrate this idea, the contrary
          seemed to them to be inconceivable and mad; and nevertheless this
          contrary corresponds to the naked reality which has been
          demonstrated daily and hourly from time immemorial. Is it not a“dreadful”truth that all that we
          know about an act is never sufficient to accomplish it, that the
          bridge connecting the knowledge of the act with the act itself has
          never yet been built? Acts are never what they appear to us to be.
          We have taken great pains to learn that external things are not as
          they appear to us.—Well! It is the same with internal phenomena.
          All moral acts are in reality“something
          different,”—we cannot say anything more about them, and all
          acts are essentially unknown to us. The general belief, however,
          has been and still is quite the contrary: the most ancient realism[pg 122]is against us: up to
          the present humanity has thought,“An
          action is what it appears to be.”(In re-reading these words
          a very expressive passage from Schopenhauer occurs to me, and I
          will quote it as a proof that he, too, without the slightest
          scruple, continued to adhere to this moral realism:“Each one of us is in reality a competent and perfect
          moral judge, knowing exactly good and evil, made holy by loving
          good and despising evil,—such is every one of us in so far as the
          acts of others and not his own are under consideration, and when he
          has merely to approve or disapprove, whilst the burden of the
          performance of the acts is borne by other shoulders. Every one is
          therefore justified in occupying as confessor the place of
          God.”)117.In
          Prison.—My eye, whether it be keen or weak, can only
          see a certain distance, and it is within this space that I live and
          move: this horizon is my immediate fate, greater or lesser, from
          which I cannot escape. Thus, a concentric circle is drawn round
          every being, which has a centre and is peculiar to himself. In the
          same way our ear encloses us in a small space, and so likewise does
          our touch. We measure the world by these horizons within which our
          senses confine each of us within prison walls. We say that this is
          near and that is far distant, that this is large and that is small,
          that one thing is hard and another soft; and this appreciation of
          things we call sensation—but it is all an errorper se! According to the number[pg 123]of events and
          emotions which it is on an average possible for us to experience in
          a given space of time, we measure our lives; we call them short or
          long, rich or poor, full or empty; and according to the average of
          human life we estimate that of other beings,—and all this is an
          errorper se!If we had eyes a
          hundred times more piercing to examine the things that surround us,
          men would seem to us to be enormously tall; we can even imagine
          organs by means of which men would appear to us to be of
          immeasurable stature. On the other hand, certain organs could be so
          formed as to permit us to view entire solar systems as if they were
          contracted and brought close together like a single cell: and to
          beings of an inverse order a single cell of the human body could be
          made to appear in its construction, movement, and harmony as if it
          were a solar system in itself. The habits of our senses have
          wrapped us up in a tissue of lying sensations which in their turn
          lie at the base of all our judgments and our“knowledge,”—there are no means of exit or
          escape to the real world! We are like spiders in our own webs, and,
          whatever we may catch in them, it will only be something that our
          web is capable of catching.118.What is our
          Neighbour?—What do we conceive of our neighbour
          except his limits: I mean that whereby he, as it were, engraves and
          stamps himself in and upon us? We can understand nothing of him
          except the changes which take place[pg 124]upon our own person and of which he is the
          cause, what we know of him is like a hollow, modelled space. We
          impute to him the feelings which his acts arouse in us, and thus
          give him a wrong and inverted positivity. We form him after our
          knowledge of ourselves into a satellite of our own system, and if
          he shines upon us, or grows dark, and we in any case are the
          ultimate cause of his doing so, we nevertheless still believe the
          contrary! O world of phantoms in which we live! O world so
          perverted, topsy-turvy and empty, and yet dreamt of as full and
          upright!119.Experience and
          Invention.—To however high a degree a man can attain
          to knowledge of himself, nothing can be more incomplete than the
          conception which he forms of the instincts constituting his
          individuality. He can scarcely name the more common instincts:
          their number and force, their flux and reflux, their action and
          counteraction, and, above all, the laws of their nutrition, remain
          absolutely unknown to him. This nutrition, therefore, becomes a
          work of chance: the daily experiences of our lives throw their prey
          now to this instinct and now to that, and the instincts gradually
          seize upon it; but the ebb and flow of these experiences does not
          stand in any rational relationship to the nutritive needs of the
          total number of the instincts. Two things, then, must always
          happen: some cravings will be neglected and starved to death, while
          others will be overfed. Every moment in the life of man causes some
          polypous arms of his being to grow and[pg 125]others to wither away, in accordance with the
          nutriment which that moment may or may not bring with it. Our
          experiences, as I have already said, are all in this sense means of
          nutriment, but scattered about with a careless hand and without
          discrimination between the hungry and the overfed. As a consequence
          of this accidental nutrition of each particular part, the polypus
          in its complete development will be something just as fortuitous as
          its growth.To put this more
          clearly: let us suppose that an instinct or craving has reached
          that point when it demands gratification,—either the exercise of
          its power or the discharge of it, or the filling up of a vacuum
          (all this is metaphorical language),—then it will examine every
          event that occurs in the course of the day to ascertain how it can
          be utilised with the object of fulfilling its aim: whether the man
          runs or rests, or is angry, or reads or speaks or fights or
          rejoices, the unsatiated instinct watches, as it were, every
          condition into which the man enters, and, as a rule, if it finds
          nothing for itself it must wait, still unsatisfied. After a little
          while it becomes feeble, and at the end of a few days or a few
          months, if it has not been satisfied, it will wither away like a
          plant which has not been watered. This cruelty of chance would
          perhaps be more conspicuous if all the cravings were as vehement in
          their demands as hunger, which refuses to be satisfied with
          imaginary dishes; but the great majority of our instincts,
          especially those which are called moral, are thus easily
          satisfied,—if it be permitted to suppose that our dreams serve as
          compensation to a certain extent for the accidental[pg 126]absence of“nutriment”during the day. Why was last night's
          dream full of tenderness and tears, that of the night before
          amusing and gay, and the previous one adventurous and engaged in
          some continual obscure search? How does it come about that in this
          dream I enjoy indescribable beauties of music, and in that one I
          soar and fly upwards with the delight of an eagle to the most
          distant heights?These inventions
          in which our instincts of tenderness, merriment, or
          adventurousness, or our desire for music and mountains, can have
          free play and scope—and every one can recall striking instances—are
          interpretations of our nervous irritations during sleep, very free
          and arbitrary interpretations of the movements of our blood and
          intestines, and the pressure of our arm and the bed coverings, or
          the sound of a church bell, the weathercocks, the moths, and so on.
          That this text, which on the whole is very much the same for one
          night as another, is so differently commented upon, that our
          creative reason imagines such different causes for the nervous
          irritations of one day as compared with another, may be explained
          by the fact that the prompter of this reason was different to-day
          from yesterday—another instinct or craving wished to be satisfied,
          to show itself, to exercise itself and be refreshed and discharged:
          this particular one being at its height to-day and another one
          being at its height last night. Real life has not the freedom of
          interpretation possessed by dream life; it is less poetic and less
          unrestrained—but is it necessary for me to show that our instincts,
          when we are awake, likewise merely interpret our nervous
          irritations and[pg
          127]determine their“causes”in
          accordance with their requirements? that there is no really
          essential difference between waking and dreaming! that even in
          comparing different degrees of culture, the freedom of the
          conscious interpretation of the one is not in any way inferior to
          the freedom in dreams of the other! that our moral judgments and
          valuations are only images and fantasies concerning physiological
          processes unknown to us, a kind of habitual language to describe
          certain nervous irritations? that all our so-called consciousness
          is a more or less fantastic commentary of an unknown text, one
          which is perhaps unknowable but yet felt?Consider some
          insignificant occurrence. Let us suppose that some day as we pass
          along a public street we see some one laughing at us. In accordance
          with whatever craving has reached its culminating point within us
          at that moment, this incident will have this or that signification
          for us; and it will be a very different occurrence in accordance
          with the class of men to which we belong. One man will take it like
          a drop of rain, another will shake it off like a fly, a third
          person will try to pick a quarrel on account of it, a fourth will
          examine his garments to see if there is anything about them likely
          to cause laughter, and a fifth will in consequence think about what
          is ridiculousper se, a sixth
          will be pleased at having involuntarily contributed to add a ray of
          sunshine and mirth to the world,—in all these cases some craving is
          gratified, whether anger, combativeness, meditation, or
          benevolence. This instinct, whatever it may be, has seized upon
          that incident as its prey: why that particular one?[pg 128]Because, hungry and thirsty, it was
          lying in ambush.Not long ago at
          11 o'clock in the morning a man suddenly collapsed and fell down in
          front of me as if struck by lightning. All the women who were near
          at once gave utterance to cries of horror, while I set the man on
          his feet again and waited until he recovered his speech. During
          this time no muscle of my face moved and I experienced no sensation
          of fear or pity; I simply did what was most urgent and reasonable
          and calmly proceeded on my way. Supposing some one had told me on
          the previous evening that at 11 o'clock on the following day a man
          would fall down in front of me like this, I should have suffered
          all kinds of agonies in the interval, lying awake all night, and at
          the decisive moment should also perhaps have fallen down like the
          man instead of helping him; for in the meantime all the imaginable
          cravings within me would have had leisure to conceive and to
          comment upon this incident. What are our experiences, then? Much
          more what we attribute to them than what they really are. Or should
          we perhaps say that nothing is contained in them? that experiences
          in themselves are merely works of fancy?120.To Tranquillise
          the Sceptic.—“I don't know at
          all what I am doing. I don't know in the least what I ought to
          do!”—You are right, but be sure of this: you are being done
          at every moment! Mankind has at all times mistaken the[pg 129]active for the passive: it is its
          eternal grammatical blunder.121.Cause and
          Effect.—On this mirror—and our intellect is a
          mirror—something is going on that indicates regularity: a certain
          thing is each time followed by another certain thing. When we
          perceive this and wish to give it a name, we call it cause and
          effect,—fools that we are! as if in this we had understood or could
          understand anything! For, of course, we have seen nothing but the
          images of causes and effects, and it is just this figurativeness
          which renders it impossible for us to see a more substantial
          relation than that of sequence!122.The Purposes in
          Nature.—Any impartial investigator who examines the
          history of the eye and its form in the lower creatures, and sees
          how the visual organ was slowly developed, cannot help recognising
          that sight was not the first purpose of the eye, but probably only
          asserted itself when pure hazard had contributed to bring together
          the apparatus. One single example of this kind, and the“final purposes”fall from our eyes
          like scales.123.Reason.—How did reason
          come into the world? As is only proper, in an irrational manner; by
          accident. We shall have to guess at this accident as a riddle.[pg 130]124.What Is
          Volition?—We laugh at a man who, stepping out of his
          room at the very minute when the sun is rising, says,“It is mywillthat the sun shall
          rise”; or at him who, unable to stop a wheel, says,“Iwishit to roll”; or,
          again, at him who, thrown in a wrestling match, says,“Here I lie, but here Iwishto
          lie.”But, joking apart, do we not act like one of these
          three persons whenever we use the expression“I wish”?125.On the Domain
          of Freedom.—We canthinkmany more things than we can do and experience—i.e.our faculty of thinking is superficial and is satisfied with what
          lies on the surface, it does not even perceive this surface. If our
          intellect were strictly developed in proportion to our power, and
          our exercise of this power, the primary principle of our thinking
          would be that we can understand only that which we are able to
          do—if, indeed, there is any understanding at all. The thirsty man
          is without water, but the creations of his imagination continually
          bring the image of water to his sight, as if nothing could be more
          easily procured. The superficial and easily satisfied character of
          the intellect cannot understand real need, and thus feels itself
          superior. It is proud of being able to do more, to run faster, and
          to reach the goal almost within the twinkling of an eye: and in
          this way the domain of thought, when contrasted with the domain of[pg 131]action, volition,
          and experience, appears to be the domain of liberty, while, as I
          have already stated, it is nothing but the domain of superficiality
          and self-sufficiency.126.Forgetfulness.—It has
          never yet been proved that there is such a thing as forgetfulness:
          all that we know is that we have no power over recollection. In the
          meantime we have filled up this gap in our power with the word“forgetfulness,”exactly as if it
          were another faculty added to our list. But, after all, what is
          within our power? If that word fills up a gap in our power, might
          not the other words be found capable of filling up a gap in the
          knowledge which we possess of our power?127.For a Definite
          Purpose.—Of all human actions probably the least
          understood are those which are carried out for a definite purpose,
          because they have always been regarded as the most intelligible and
          commonplace to our intellect. The great problems can be picked up
          in the highways and byways.128.Dreaming and
          Responsibility.—You would wish to be responsible for
          everything except your dreams! What miserable weakness, what lack
          of logical courage! Nothing contains more of your[pg 132]own work than your dreams! Nothing
          belongs to you so much! Substance, form, duration, actor,
          spectator—in these comedies you act as your complete selves! And
          yet it is just here that you are afraid and ashamed of yourselves,
          and even Oedipus, the wise Oedipus, derived consolation from the
          thought that we cannot be blamed for what we dream. From this I
          must conclude that the great majority of men must have some
          dreadful dreams to reproach themselves with. If it were otherwise,
          to how great an extent would these nocturnal fictions have been
          exploited in the interests of man's pride! Need I add that the wise
          Oedipus was right, that we are really not responsible for our
          dreams any more than for our waking hours, and that the doctrine of
          free will has as its parents man's pride and sense of power!
          Perhaps I say this too often; but that does not prove that it is
          not true.129.The Alleged
          Combat of Motives.—People speak of the“combat of motives,”but they designate by this
          expression that which is not a combat of motives at all. What I
          mean is that, in our meditative consciousness, the consequences of
          different actions which we think we are able to carry out present
          themselves successively, one after the other, and we compare these
          consequences in our mind. We think we have come to a decision
          concerning an action after we have established to our own
          satisfaction that the consequences of this[pg 133]action will be favourable. Before we arrive
          at this conclusion, however, we often seriously worry because of
          the great difficulties we experience in guessing what the
          consequences are likely to be, and in seeing them in their full
          importance, without exception—and, after all this, we must reckon
          up any fortuitous elements that are likely to arise. Then comes the
          chief difficulty: all the consequences which we have with such
          difficulty determined one by one must be weighed on some scales
          against each other; and it only too often comes about that, owing
          to the difference in the quality of all the conceivable
          consequences, both scales and weights are lacking for this
          casuistry of advantage.Even supposing,
          however, that in this case we are able to overcome the difficulty,
          and that mere hazard has placed in our scales results which permit
          of a mutual balance, we have now, in the idea of the consequences
          of a particular action, a motive for performing this very action,
          but only one motive! When we have finally decided to act, however,
          we are fairly often influenced by another order of motives than
          those of the“image of the
          consequences.”What brings this about may be the habitual
          working of our inner machinery, or some little encouragement on the
          part of a person whom we fear or honour or love, or the love of
          comfort which prefers to do that which lies nearest; or some
          stirring of the imagination provoked at the decisive moment by some
          event of trifling importance; or some physical influence which
          manifests itself quite unexpectedly; a mere whim brings it about;
          or the outburst of a passion which, as it accidentally[pg 134]happens, is ready to burst forth—in a
          word, motives operate which we do not understand very well, or
          which we do not understand at all, and which we can never balance
          against one another in advance.It is probable
          that a contest is going on among these motives too, a driving
          backwards and forwards, a rising and lowering of the parts, and it
          is this which would be the real“contest of
          motives,”something quite invisible and unknown to us. I
          have calculated the consequences and the successes, and in doing so
          have set a very necessary motive in the line of combat with the
          other motives,—but I am as little able to draw up this battle line
          as to see it: the battle itself is hidden from my sight, as
          likewise is the victory, as victory; for I certainly come to know
          what I shall finally do, but I cannot know what motive has in the
          end proved to be the victor. Nevertheless, we are decidedly not in
          the habit of taking all these unconscious phenomena into account,
          and we generally conceive of the preliminary stages of an action
          only so far as they are conscious: thus we mistake the combat of
          the motives for a comparison of the possible consequences of
          different actions,—a mistake that brings with it most important
          consequences, and consequences that are most fatal to the
          development of morals.130.Aims?
          Will?—We have accustomed ourselves to believe in two
          kingdoms, the domain of purposes and volition, and the domain of
          chance. In[pg
          135]this latter domain everything is done senselessly, there is a
          continual going to and fro without any one being able to say why or
          wherefore. We stand in awe of this powerful realm of the great
          cosmic stupidity, for in most instances we learn to know it when it
          falls down upon the other world, that of aims and intentions, like
          a slate from a roof, always overwhelming some beautiful purpose of
          ours.This belief in
          these two kingdoms arises from ancient romanticism and legend: we
          clever dwarfs, with all our will and aims, are interfered with,
          knocked down, and very often crushed to death by those ultra-stupid
          giants, the accidents,—but in spite of this we should not like to
          be deprived of the fearful poetry of their proximity, for these
          monsters very often make their appearance when life in the spider's
          web of definite aims has become too tiresome or too anxious for us,
          and they sometimes bring about a divine diversion when their hands
          for once tear the whole web in pieces,—not that these irrational
          beings ever intend to do what they do, or even observe it. But
          their coarse and bony hands rend our web as if it were thin
          air.Moira was the
          name given by the Greeks to this realm of the incalculable and of
          sublime and eternal limitedness; and they set it round their gods
          like a horizon beyond which they could neither see nor act,—with
          that secret defiance of the gods which one meets with in different
          nations; the gods are worshipped, but a final trump card is held in
          readiness to play against them. As instances of this we may
          recollect that the Indians and the[pg 136]Persians, who conceived all their gods as
          having to depend upon the sacrifices of mortals, so that if it came
          to the worst the mortals could, at least, let the gods die of
          starvation; or the gods of the stubborn and melancholy
          Scandinavians, who enjoyed a quiet revenge in the thought that a
          twilight of the gods was to come as some compensation for the
          perpetual fear which their evil gods caused them. The case of
          Christianity was very different, for its essential feelings were
          not those of the Indians, Persians, Greeks, or Scandinavians.
          Christianity commanded its disciples to worship in the dust the
          spirit of power, and to kiss the very dust. It gave the world to
          understand that this omnipotent“realm of
          stupidity”was not so stupid as it seemed, and that we, on
          the contrary, were stupid when we could not perceive that behind
          this realm stood God Himself: He who, although fond of dark,
          crooked and wonderful ways, at last brought everything to a“glorious end.”This new myth of
          God, who had hitherto been mistaken for a race of giants or Moira,
          and who was now Himself the spinner and weaver of webs and purposes
          even more subtle than those of our own intellect—so subtle, indeed,
          that they appear to be incomprehensible and even unreasonable—this
          myth was so bold a transformation and so daring a paradox that the
          over-refined ancient world could not resist it, however extravagant
          and contradictory the thing seemed: for, let it be said in
          confidence, there was a contradiction in it,—if our intellect
          cannot divine the intellect and aims of God, how did it divine this
          quality of its intellect and this quality of God's
          intellect?[pg
          137]In more modern
          times, indeed, the doubt has increased as to whether the slate that
          falls from the roof is really thrown by“Divine love,”and mankind again harks back to
          the old romance of giants and dwarfs. Let us learn then, for it is
          time we did so, that even in our supposed separate domain of aims
          and reason the giants likewise rule. And our aims and reason are
          not dwarfs, but giants. And our own webs are just as often and as
          clumsily rent by ourselves as by the slate. And not everything is
          purpose that is called purpose, and still less is everything will
          that is called will. And if you come to the conclusion,“Then there is only one domain, that of
          stupidity and hazard?”it must be added that possibly there
          is only one domain, possibly there is neither will nor aim, and we
          may only have imagined these things. Those iron hands of necessity
          that shake the dice-box of chance continue their game indefinitely:
          hence, it must happen that certain throws perfectly resemble every
          degree of appropriateness and good sense. It may be that our own
          voluntary acts and purposes are merely such throws, and that we are
          too circumscribed and vain to conceive our extremely circumscribed
          state! that we ourselves shake the dice-box with iron hands, and do
          nothing in our most deliberate actions but play the game of
          necessity. Possibly! To rise beyond this“possibly”we should indeed have been guests in
          the Underworld, playing at dice and betting with Proserpine at the
          table of the goddess herself.[pg 138]131.Moral
          Fashions.—How moral judgments as a whole have
          changed! The greatest marvels of the morality of antiquity, such as
          Epictetus, knew nothing of the glorification, now so common, of the
          spirit of sacrifice, of living for others: after the fashion of
          morality now prevailing we should really call them immoral; for
          they fought with all their strength for their own ego and against
          all sympathy for others, especially for the sufferings and moral
          imperfections of others. Perhaps they would reply to us by saying,“If you feel yourselves to be such dull and
          ugly people, by all means think of others more than yourselves. You
          will be quite right in doing so!”132.The Last Echoes
          of Christianity In Morals.—“On n'est bon que par la pitié: il faut donc qu'il y
          ait quelque pitié dans tous nos sentiments”—so says morality
          nowadays. And how does this come about? The fact that the man who
          performs social, sympathetic, disinterested, and benevolent actions
          is now considered as the moral man: this is perhaps the most
          general effect, the most complete transformation, that Christianity
          has produced in Europe; perhaps in spite of itself, and not by any
          means because this was part of its essential doctrine. But this was
          the residuum of those Christian feelings that prevailed at the time
          when the contrary and thoroughly selfish faith in the“one thing needful,”the absolute[pg 139]importance of eternal and personal
          salvation, together with the dogmas upon which this belief had
          rested, were gradually receding, and when the auxiliary beliefs in“love”and“love of one's neighbour,”harmonising with the
          extraordinary practice of charity by the Church, were thereby
          coming to the front. The more people gradually became separated
          from the dogmas, the more did they seek some sort of justification
          for this separation in a cult of the love of humanity: not to fall
          short in this respect of the Christian ideal, but to excel it if
          possible, was the secret stimulus of all the French free-thinkers
          from Voltaire to Auguste Comte; and this latter with his famous
          moral formula“vivre pour autrui”has indeed out-christianised even Christianity!It was
          Schopenhauer in Germany and John Stuart Mill in England who were
          the means of bringing into the greatest prominence this doctrine of
          sympathetic affections and of pity or utility to others as a
          principle of action; but these men themselves were only echoes.
          From about the time of the French Revolution these doctrines have
          manifested themselves in various places with enormous force. Since
          then they have shown themselves in their coarsest as well has their
          most subtle form, and all Socialistic principles have almost
          involuntarily taken their stand on the common ground of this
          doctrine. At the present time there is perhaps no more widely
          spread prejudice than that of thinking that we know what really and
          truly constitutes morality. Every one now seems to learn with
          satisfaction that society is beginning[pg 140]to adapt the individual to the general needs,
          and that it is at the same time the happiness and sacrifice of each
          one to consider himself as a useful member and instrument of the
          whole. They have still, however, doubts as to the form in which
          this whole is to be looked for, whether in a state already
          existing, or in one which has yet to be established, or in a
          nation, or in an international brotherhood, or in new and small
          economic communities. On this point there is still much reflection,
          doubt, struggling, excitement, and passion; but it is pleasant and
          wonderful to observe the unanimity with which the“ego”is called upon to practice self-denial,
          until, in the form of adaptation to the whole, it once again
          secures its own fixed sphere of rights and duties,—until, indeed,
          it has become something quite new and different. Nothing else is
          being attempted, whether admitted or not, than the complete
          transformation, even the weakening and suppression of the
          individual: the supporters of the majority never tire of
          enumerating and anathematising all that is bad, hostile, lavish,
          expensive, and luxurious in the form of individual existence that
          has hitherto prevailed; they hope that society may be administered
          in a cheaper, less dangerous, more uniform, and more harmonious way
          when nothing is left but large corporations and their members. All
          that is considered as good which in any way corresponds to this
          desire for grouping men into one particular society, and to the
          minor cravings which necessarily accompany this desire,—this is the
          chief moral current of our time; sympathy and social feelings are
          working[pg
          141]hand in glove. (Kant is still outside of this movement: he
          expressly teaches that we should be insensible to the sufferings of
          others if our benevolence is to have any moral value,—a doctrine
          which Schopenhauer, very angrily, as may easily be imagined,
          described as the Kantian absurdity.)133.“No longer thinking of One's
          Self.”—Let us seriously consider why we should
          jump into the water to rescue some one who has just fallen in
          before our eyes, although we may have no particular sympathy for
          him. We do it for pity's sake; no one thinks now but of his
          neighbour,—so says thoughtlessness. Why do we experience grief and
          uneasiness when we see some one spit blood, although we may be
          really ill-disposed towards him and wish him no good? Out of pity;
          we have ceased to think of ourselves,—so says thoughtlessness
          again. The truth is that in our pity—I mean by this what we
          erroneously call“pity”—we no longer
          think consciously of ourselves, but quite unconsciously, exactly as
          when slipping we unconsciously make the best counter-motions
          possible in order to recover our balance, and in doing so clearly
          use all our intelligence. A mishap to another offends us; it would
          bring our impotence, or perhaps our cowardice, into strong relief
          if we could do nothing to help him; or in itself it would give rise
          to a diminution of our honour in the eyes of others and of
          ourselves. Or again, accidents that happen to others act as
          finger-posts to point out our own danger, and even as[pg 142]indications of human peril and frailty
          they can produce a painful effect upon us. We shake off this kind
          of pain and offence, and balance it by an act of pity behind which
          may be hidden a subtle form of self-defence or even revenge. That
          at bottom we strongly think of ourselves may easily be divined from
          the decision that we arrive at in all cases where we can avoid the
          sight of those who are suffering or starving or wailing. We make up
          our minds not to avoid such people when we can approach them as
          powerful and helpful ones, when we can safely reckon upon their
          applause, or wish to feel the contrast of our own happiness, or,
          again, when we hope to get rid of our own boredom. It is misleading
          to call the suffering that we experience at such a sight, and which
          may be of a very different kind, commiseration. For in all cases it
          is a suffering from which the suffering person before us is free:
          it is our own suffering, just as his suffering is his own. It is
          thus only this personal feeling of misery that we get rid of by
          acts of compassion. Nevertheless, we never act thus from one single
          motive: as it is certain that we wish to free ourselves from
          suffering thereby, it is also certain that by the same action we
          yield to an impulse of pleasure. Pleasure arises at the sight of a
          contrast to our own condition, at the knowledge that we should be
          able to help if only we wished to do so, at the thought of the
          praise and gratitude which we should gain if we did help, at the
          very act of helping, in so far as this might prove successful (and
          because something which is gradually seen to be successful gives
          pleasure to the doer); but even more particularly at the feeling
          that our intervention[pg
          143]brings to an end some deplorable injustice,—even the outburst of
          one's indignation is invigorating.All this,
          including even things still more subtle, comprises“pity.”How clumsily with this one word does
          language fall foul of such a complex and polyphonous organism! That
          pity, on the other hand, is identical with the suffering the sight
          of which brings it about, or that it has a particularly subtle and
          penetrating comprehension of it: this is in contradiction to
          experience, and he who has glorified pity under these two heads
          lacked sufficient experience in the domain of morals. That is why I
          am seized with some doubts when reading of the incredible things
          attributed by Schopenhauer to pity. It is obvious that he thereby
          wished to make us believe in the great novelty he brought forward,
          viz., that pity—the pity which he observed so superficially and
          described so badly—was the source of all and every past and future
          moral action,—and all this precisely because of those faculties
          which he had begun by attributing to it.What is it in
          the end that distinguishes men without pity from men who are really
          compassionate? In particular, to give merely an approximate
          indication, they have not the sensitive feeling for fear, the
          subtle faculty for perceiving danger: nor yet is their vanity so
          easily wounded if something happens which they might have been able
          to prevent,—the caution of their pride commands them not to
          interfere uselessly with the affairs of others; they even act on
          the belief that every one should help himself and play his own
          cards. Again, in[pg
          144]most cases they are more habituated to bearing pain than
          compassionate men, and it does not seem at all unjust to them that
          others should suffer, since they themselves have suffered. Lastly,
          the state of soft-heartedness is as painful to them as is the state
          of stoical impassability to compassionate men: they have only
          disdainful words for sensitive hearts, as they think that such a
          state of feeling is dangerous to their own manliness and calm
          bravery,—they conceal their tears from others and wipe them off,
          angry with themselves. They belong to a different type of egoists
          from the compassionate men,—but to call them, in a distinct sense,
          evil and the compassionate ones good, is merely a moral fashion
          which has had its innings, just as the reverse fashion had also its
          innings, and a long innings, too.