134.To what Extent
          we must Beware of Pity.—Pity, in so far as it
          actually gives rise to suffering—and this must be our only point of
          view here—is a weakness, like every other indulgence in an
          injurious emotion. It increases suffering throughout the world, and
          although here and there a certain amount of suffering may be
          indirectly diminished or removed altogether as a consequence of
          pity, we must not bring forward these occasional consequences,
          which are on the whole insignificant, to justify the nature of pity
          which, as has already been stated, is prejudicial. Supposing that
          it prevailed, even if only for one day, it would bring humanity to
          utter ruin. In itself the nature of pity is no better than[pg 145]that of any other
          craving; it is only where it is called for and praised—and this
          happens when people do not understand what is injurious in it, but
          find in it a sort of joy—that a good conscience becomes attached to
          it; it is only then that we willingly yield to it, and do not
          shrink from acknowledging it. In other circumstances where it is
          understood to be dangerous, it is looked upon as a weakness; or, as
          in the case of the Greeks, as an unhealthy periodical emotion the
          danger of which might be removed by temporary and voluntary
          discharges. If a man were to undertake the experiment of
          deliberately devoting his attention to the opportunities afforded
          by practical life for the exercise of pity, and were over and over
          again to picture in his own mind the misery he might meet with in
          his immediate surroundings, he would inevitably become melancholy
          and ill. If, however, he wished in any sense of the word to serve
          humanity as a physician, he would have to take many precautions
          with respect to this feeling, as otherwise it would paralyse him at
          all critical moments, undermine the foundations of his knowledge,
          and unnerve his helpful and delicate hand.135.Arousing
          Pity.—Among savages men think with a moral shudder of
          the possibility of becoming an object of pity, for such a state
          they regard as deprived of all virtue. Pitying is equivalent to
          despising: they do not want to see a contemptible being suffer, for
          this would afford them no enjoyment.[pg 146]On the other hand, to behold one of their
          enemies suffering, some one whom they look upon as their equal in
          pride, but whom torture cannot induce to give up his pride, and in
          general to see some one suffer who refuses to lower himself by
          appealing for pity—which would in their eyes be the most profound
          and shameful humiliation—this is the very joy of joys. Such a
          spectacle excites the deepest admiration in the soul of the savage,
          and he ends by killing such a brave man when it is in his power,
          afterwards according funeral honours to the unbending one. If he
          had groaned, however; if his countenance had lost its expression of
          calm disdain; if he had shown himself to be contemptible,—well, in
          such a case he might have been allowed to live like a dog: he would
          no longer have aroused the pride of the spectator, and pity would
          have taken the place of admiration.136.Happiness in
          Pity.—If, as is the case among the Hindus, we decree
          the end and aim of all intellectual activity to be the knowledge of
          human misery, and if for generation after generation this dreadful
          resolution be steadily adhered to, pity in the eyes of such men of
          hereditary pessimism comes to have a new value as a preserver of
          life, something that helps to make existence endurable, although it
          may seem worthy of being rejected with horror and disgust. Pity
          becomes an antidote to suicide, a sentiment which brings pleasure
          with it and enables us to taste superiority in small doses. It[pg 147]gives some diversion
          to our minds, makes our hearts full, banishes fear and lethargy,
          and incites us to speak, to complain, or to act: it is a relative
          happiness when compared with the misery of the knowledge that
          hampers the individual on every side, bewilders him, and takes away
          his breath. Happiness, however, no matter of what nature it may be,
          gives us air and light and freedom of movement.137.Why Double
          the“Ego”?—To view our own
          experiences in the same light as we are in the habit of looking at
          those of others is very comforting and an advisable medicine. On
          the other hand, to look upon the experiences of others and adopt
          them as if they were our own—which is called for by the philosophy
          of pity—would ruin us in a very short time: let us only make the
          experiment without trying to imagine it any longer! The first maxim
          is, in addition, undoubtedly more in accordance with reason and
          goodwill towards reason; for we estimate more objectively the value
          and significance of an event when it happens to others,—the value,
          for instance, of a death, loss of money or slander. But pity,
          taking as its principle of action the injunction,“Suffer the misfortune of another as much as he
          himself,”would lead the point of view of the ego with all
          its exaggerations and deviations to become the point of view of the
          other person, the sympathiser: so that we should have to suffer at
          the same time from our own ego and the other's ego. In this way we
          would voluntarily overload[pg 148]ourselves with a double irrationality,
          instead of making the burden of our own as light as possible.138.Becoming more
          Tender.—Whenever we love some one and venerate and
          admire him, and afterwards come to perceive that he is
          suffering—which always causes us the utmost astonishment, since we
          cannot but feel that the happiness we derive from him must flow
          from a superabundant source of personal happiness—our feelings of
          love, veneration, and admiration are essentially changed: they
          become more tender; that is, the gap that separates us seems to be
          bridged over and there appears to be an approach to equality. It
          now seems possible to give him something in return, whilst we had
          previously imagined him as being altogether above our gratitude.
          Our ability to requite him for what we have received from him
          arouses in us feelings of much joy and pleasure. We endeavour to
          ascertain what can best calm the grief of our friend, and we give
          it to him; if he wishes for kind words, looks, attentions,
          services, or presents, we give them; but, above all, if he would
          like to see us suffering from the sight of his suffering, we
          pretend to suffer, for all this secures for us the enjoyment of
          active gratitude, which is equivalent in a way to good-natured
          revenge. If he wants none of these things, and refuses to accept
          them from us, we depart from him chilled and sad, almost mortified;
          it appears to us as if our gratitude had been declined, and on this
          point of honour even the[pg
          149]best of men is still somewhat touchy. It results from all this that
          even in the best case there is something humiliating in suffering,
          and something elevating and superior in sympathy,—a fact which will
          keep the two feelings apart for ever and ever.139.Higher in Name
          only.—You say that the morality of pity is a higher
          morality than that of stoicism? Prove it! But take care not to
          measure the“higher”and“lower”degrees of morality once
          more by moral yardsticks; for there are no absolute morals. So take
          your yardstick from somewhere else, and be on your guard!140.Praise and
          Blame.—When a war has come to an unsuccessful
          conclusion we try to find the man who is to blame for the war; when
          it comes to a successful conclusion we praise the man who is
          responsible for it. In all unsuccessful cases attempts are made to
          blame somebody, for non-success gives rise to dejection, against
          which the single possible remedy is involuntarily applied; a new
          incitement of the sense of power; and this incitement is found in
          the condemnation of the“guilty”one. This guilty one is not perhaps the scapegoat of the faults of
          others; he is merely the victim of the feeble, humiliated, and
          depressed people who wish to prove upon some one that they have not
          yet lost all their power. Even self-condemnation after a defeat may
          be the means of restoring the feeling of power.[pg 150]On the other
          hand, glorification of the originator is often but an equally blind
          result of another instinct that demands its victim,—and in this
          case the sacrifice appears to be sweet and attractive even for the
          victim. This happens when the feeling of power is satiated in a
          nation or a society by so great and fascinating a success that a
          weariness of victory supervenes and pride wishes to be discharged:
          a feeling of self-sacrifice is aroused and looks for its object.
          Thus, whether we are blamed or praised we merely, as a rule,
          provide opportunities for the gratification of others, and are only
          too often caught up and whirled away for our neighbours to
          discharge upon us their accumulated feelings of praise or blame. In
          both cases we confer a benefit upon them for which we deserve no
          credit and they no thanks.141.More Beautiful
          but Less Valuable.—Picturesque morality: such is the
          morality of those passions characterised by sudden outbursts,
          abrupt transitions; pathetic, impressive, dreadful, and solemn
          attitudes and gestures. It is the semi-savage stage of morality:
          never let us be tempted to set it on a higher plane merely on
          account of its æsthetic charms.142.Sympathy.—In order to
          understand our neighbour, that is, in order to reproduce his
          sentiments in ourselves, we often, no doubt, plumb the cause of his
          feelings, as, for example, by asking ourselves, Why[pg 151]is he sad? in order that we may become
          sad ourselves for the same reason. But we much more frequently
          neglect to act thus, and we produce these feelings in ourselves in
          accordance with theeffectswhich they exhibit in the
          person we are studying,—by imitating in our own body the expression
          of his eyes, his voice, his gait, his attitude (or, at any rate,
          the likeness of these things in words, pictures, and music), or we
          may at least endeavour to mimic the action of his muscles and
          nervous system. A like feeling will then spring up in us as the
          result of an old association of movements and sentiments which has
          been trained to run backwards and forwards. We have developed to a
          very high pitch this knack of sounding the feelings of others, and
          when we are in the presence of any one else we bring this faculty
          of ours into play almost involuntarily,—let the inquirer observe
          the animation of a woman's countenance and notice how it vibrates
          and quivers with animation as the result of the continual imitation
          and reflection of what is going on around her.It is music,
          however, more than anything else that shows us what past-masters we
          are in the rapid and subtle divination of feelings and sympathy;
          for even if music is only the imitation of an imitation of
          feelings, nevertheless, despite its distance and vagueness, it
          often enables us to participate in those feelings, so that we
          become sad without any reason for feeling so, like the fools that
          we are, merely because we hear certain sounds and rhythms that
          somehow or other remind us of the intonation and the movements, or
          perhaps even only of the behaviour, of sorrowful people. It is
          related of a[pg
          152]certain Danish king that he was wrought up to such a pitch of
          warlike enthusiasm by the song of a minstrel that he sprang to his
          feet and killed five persons of his assembled court: there was
          neither war nor enemy; there was rather the exact opposite; yet the
          power of the retrospective inference from a feeling to the cause of
          it was sufficiently strong in this king to overpower both his
          observation and his reason. Such, however, is almost invariably the
          effect of music (provided that it thrills us), and we have no need
          of such paradoxical instances to recognise this,—the state of
          feeling into which music transports us is almost always in
          contradiction to the appearance of our actual state, and of our
          reasoning power which recognises this actual state and its
          causes.If we inquire
          how it happened that this imitation of the feelings of others has
          become so common, there will be no doubt as to the answer: man
          being the most timid of all beings because of his subtle and
          delicate nature has been made familiar through his timidity with
          this sympathy for, and rapid comprehension of, the feelings of
          others, even of animals. For century after century he saw danger in
          everything that was unfamiliar to him, in anything that happened to
          be alive, and whenever the spectacle of such things and creatures
          came before his eyes he imitated their features and attitude,
          drawing at the same time his own conclusion as to the nature of the
          evil intentions they concealed. This interpretation of all
          movements and all facial characteristics in the sense of
          intentions, man has even brought to bear on things inanimate,—urged
          on as he was by the illusion that there was nothing inanimate. I[pg 153]believe that this is
          the origin of everything that we now call a feeling for nature,
          that sensation of joy which men experience at the sight of the sky,
          the fields, the rocks, the forests, the storms, the stars, the
          landscapes, and spring: without our old habits of fear which forced
          us to suspect behind everything a kind of second and more recondite
          sense, we should now experience no delight in nature, in the same
          way as men and animals do not cause us to rejoice if we have not
          first been deterred by that source of all understanding, namely,
          fear. For joy and agreeable surprise, and finally the feeling of
          ridicule, are the younger children of sympathy, and the much
          younger brothers and sisters of fear. The faculty of rapid
          perception, which is based on the faculty of rapid dissimulation,
          decreases in proud and autocratic men and nations, as they are less
          timid; but, on the other hand, every category of understanding and
          dissimulation is well known to timid peoples, and among them is to
          be found the real home of imitative arts and superior
          intelligence.When, proceeding
          from the theory of sympathy such as I have just outlined, I turn my
          attention to the theory, now so popular and almost sacrosanct, of a
          mystical process by means of which pity blends two beings into one,
          and thus permits them immediately to understand one another, when I
          recollect that even so clear a brain as Schopenhauer's delighted in
          such fantastic nonsense, and that he in his turn transplanted this
          delight into other lucid and semi-lucid brains, I feel unlimited
          astonishment and compassion. How great must be the pleasure we
          experience in this senseless tomfoolery! How[pg 154]near must even a sane man be to
          insanity as soon as he listens to his own secret intellectual
          desires!—Why did Schopenhauer really feel so grateful, so
          profoundly indebted to Kant? He revealed on one occasion the
          undoubted answer to this question. Some one had spoken of the way
          in which thequalitias
          occultaof Kant's Categorical Imperative might be got
          rid of, so that the theory itself might be rendered intelligible.
          Whereupon Schopenhauer gave utterance to the following outburst:“An intelligible Categorical Imperative!
          Preposterous idea! Stygian darkness! God forbid that it should ever
          become intelligible! The fact that there is actually something
          unintelligible, that this misery of the understanding and its
          conceptions is limited, conditional, final, and deceptive,—this is
          beyond question Kant's great gift.”Let any one consider
          whether a man can be in possession of a desire to gain an insight
          into moral things when he feels himself comforted from the start by
          a belief in the inconceivableness of these things! one who still
          honestly believes in illuminations from above, in magic, in ghostly
          appearances, and in the metaphysical ugliness of the toad!143.Woe to us if
          this Impulse should Rage!—Supposing that the impulse
          towards devotion and care for others (“sympathetic affection”) were doubly as strong
          as it now is, life on earth could not be endured. Let it only be
          considered how many foolish things every one of us does day by day
          and hour by hour, merely out of solicitude and[pg 155]devotion for himself, and how
          unbearable he seems in doing so: and what then would it be like if
          we were to become for other people the object of the stupidities
          and importunities with which up to the present they have only
          tormented themselves! Should we not then take precipitately to our
          heels as soon as one of our neighbours came towards us? And would
          it not be necessary to overwhelm this sympathetic affection with
          the abuse that we now reserve for egoism?144.Closing our
          Ears to the Complaints of others.—When we let our sky
          be clouded by the complaints and suffering of other mortals, who
          must bear the consequences of such gloom? No doubt those other
          mortals, in addition to all their other burdens! If we are merely
          to be the echoes of their complaints, we cannot accord them either
          help or comfort; nor can we do so if we were continually keeping
          our ears open to listen to them,—unless we have learnt the art of
          the Olympians, who, instead of trying to make themselves unhappy,
          endeavoured to feel edified by the misfortunes of mankind. But this
          is something too Olympian for us, although, in our enjoyment of
          tragedy, we have already taken a step towards this ideal divine
          cannibalism.145.“Unegoistic.”—This man is empty
          and wishes to be filled, that one is over-full and wishes to be
          emptied: both of them feel themselves urged on[pg 156]to look for an individual who can help
          them. And this phenomenon, interpreted in a higher sense, is in
          both cases known by the same name,“love.”Well? and could this love be something
          unegoistic?146.Looking Beyond
          our Neighbour.—What? Ought the nature of true
          morality to consist for us in fixing our eyes upon the most direct
          and immediate consequences of our action for other people, and in
          our coming to a decision accordingly? This is only a narrow and
          bourgeois morality, even though it may be a morality: but it seems
          to me that it would be more superior and liberal to look beyond
          these immediate consequences for our neighbour in order to
          encourage more distant purposes, even at the risk of making others
          suffer,—as, for example, by encouraging the spirit of knowledge in
          spite of the certainty that our free-thought will have the instant
          effect of plunging others into doubt, grief, and even worse
          afflictions. Have we not at least the right to treat our neighbour
          as we treat ourselves? And if, where we are concerned, we do not
          think in such a narrow and bourgeois fashion of immediate
          consequences and sufferings, why should we be compelled to act thus
          in regard to our neighbour? Supposing that we felt ready to
          sacrifice ourselves, what is there to prevent us from sacrificing
          our neighbour together with ourselves,—just as States and
          Sovereigns have hitherto sacrificed one citizen to the others,“for the sake of the general
          interest,”as they say?[pg 157]We too, however,
          have general interests, perhaps even more general than theirs: so
          why may we not sacrifice a few individuals of this generation for
          the benefit of generations to come? so that their affliction,
          anxiety, despair, blunders, and misery may be deemed essential
          because a new plough is to break up the ground and render it
          fertile for all. Finally, we communicate the disposition to our
          neighbour by which he is enabled to feel himself a victim: we
          persuade him to carry out the task for which we employ him. Are we
          then devoid of all pity? If, however, we wish to achieve a victory
          over ourselves beyond our pity, is not this a higher and more
          liberal attitude and disposition than that in which we only feel
          safe after having ascertained whether an action benefits or harms
          our neighbour? On the contrary, it is by means of such
          sacrifice—including the sacrifice of ourselves, as well as of our
          neighbours—that we should strengthen and elevate the general sense
          of human power, even supposing that we attain nothing more than
          this. But even this itself would be a positive increase of
          happiness. Then, if even this ... but not a word more! You have
          understood me at a glance.147.The Cause
          of“Altruism.”—Men have on the
          whole spoken of love with so much emphasis and adoration because
          they have hitherto always had so little of it, and have never yet
          been satiated with this food: in this way it became their ambrosia.
          If a poet wished to show universal benevolence in the image of a
          Utopia, he would certainly have to[pg 158]describe an agonising and ridiculous state of
          things, the like of which was never seen on earth,—every one would
          be surrounded, importuned, and sighed for, not as at present, by
          one lover, but by thousands, by everybody indeed, as the result of
          an irresistible craving which would then be as vehemently insulted
          and cursed as selfishness has been by men of past ages. The poets
          of this new condition of things, if they had sufficient leisure to
          write, would be dreaming of nothing but the blissful and loveless
          past, the divine selfishness of yore, and the wonderful
          possibilities in former times of remaining alone, not being run
          after by one's friends, and of even being hated and despised—or any
          other odious expressions which the beautiful animal world in which
          we live chooses to coin.148.Looking Far
          Ahead.—If, in accordance with the present definition,
          only those actions are moral which are done for the sake of others,
          and for their sake only, then there are no moral actions at all!
          If, in accordance with another definition, only those actions are
          moral which spring from our own free will, then there are no moral
          actions in this case either! What is it, then, that we designate
          thus, which certainly exists and wishes as a consequence to be
          explained? It is the result of a few intellectual blunders; and
          supposing that we were able to free ourselves from these errors,
          what would then become of“moral
          actions”? It is due to these errors that we have up to the
          present attributed to certain actions a value superior to what was
          theirs in reality:[pg
          159]we separated them from“egoistic”and“non-free”actions. When we now
          set them once more in the latter categories, as we must do, we
          certainly reduce their value (their own estimate of value) even
          below its reasonable level, because“egoistic”and“non-free”actions have up to the present been
          under-valued owing to that alleged profound and essential
          difference.In future, then,
          will these very actions be less frequently performed, since they
          will be less highly esteemed? Inevitably! Or at all events for a
          fairly long time, as long as the scale of valuations remains under
          the reacting influence of former mistakes! But we make some return
          for this by giving back to men their good courage for the carrying
          out of actions that are now reputed to be selfish, and thus restore
          their value,—we relieve men's bad consciences! and as up to the
          present egoistic actions have been by far the most frequent, and
          will be so to all eternity, we free the whole conception of these
          actions and of life from its evil appearance! This is a very high
          and important result. When men no longer believe themselves to be
          evil, they cease to be so.