Book III.149.Little
          Unconventional Actions are Necessary!—To act
          occasionally in matters of custom against our own better judgments;
          to yield in practice while reserving our own intellectual liberty;
          to behave like everybody else and thus to show ourselves amiable
          and considerate to all, to compensate them, as it were, even if
          only to some extent, for our unconventional opinions—all this among
          many tolerably liberal-minded men is looked upon not only as
          permissible but even as“honourable,”“humane,”“tolerant,”and“unpedantic,”or whatever fine words may be used
          to lull to sleep the intellectual conscience. So, for example, one
          man, although he may be an atheist, has his infant baptized in the
          usual Christian fashion; another goes through his period of
          military service, though he may severely condemn all hatred between
          nations; and a third runs into the Church with a girl because she
          comes from a religious family, and makes his vows to a priest
          without feeling ashamed of it.“It is of no
          importance if one of us does what every one else does and has
          done”—so says ignorant prejudice! What a profound mistake![pg 162]For nothing is of
          greater importance than that a powerful, long-established, and
          irrational custom should be once again confirmed by the act of some
          one who is recognised as rational. In this way the proceeding is
          thought to be sanctioned by reason itself! All honour to your
          opinions! but little unconventional actions are of still greater
          value.150.The Hazard of
          Marriages.—If I were a god, and a benevolent god, the
          marriages of men would cause me more displeasure than anything
          else. An individual can make very great progress within the seventy
          years of his life—yea, even within thirty years: such progress,
          indeed, as to surprise even the gods! But when we then see him
          exposing the inheritance and legacy of his struggles and victories,
          the laurel crown of his humanity, on the first convenient peg where
          any female may pick it to pieces for him; when we observe how well
          he can acquire and how little he is capable of preserving his
          acquisitions, and how he does not even dream that by procreation he
          might prepare a still more victorious life,—we then, indeed, become
          impatient and say,“Nothing can in the end
          result from humanity, individuals are wasted, for all rationality
          of a great advance of humanity is rendered impossible by the hazard
          of marriages: let us cease from being the assiduous spectators and
          fools of this aimless drama!”It was in this mood that the
          gods of Epicurus withdrew long ago to their divine seclusion and
          felicity: they were tired of men and their love affairs.[pg 163]151.Here are New
          Ideals to Invent.—At a time when a man is in love he
          should not be allowed to come to a decision about his life and to
          determine once and for all the character of his society on account
          of a whim. We ought publicly to declare invalid the vows of lovers,
          and to refuse them permission to marry: and this because we should
          treat marriage itself much more seriously, so that in cases where
          it is now contracted it would not usually be allowed in future! Are
          not the majority of marriages such that we should not care to have
          them witnessed by a third party? And yet this third party is
          scarcely ever lacking—the child—and he is more than a witness; he
          is the whipping-boy and scapegoat.152.Formula of
          Oath.—“If I am now telling a
          lie I am no longer an honourable man, and every one may say so to
          my face.”I recommend this formula in place of the present
          judicial oath and its customary invocation to the Deity: it is
          stronger. There is no reason why even religious men should oppose
          it; for as soon as the customary oath no longer serves, all the
          religious people will have to turn to their catechism, which says,“Thou shalt not take the name of the Lord
          thy God in vain.”153.The
          Malcontent.—He is one of the brave old warriors:
          angry with civilisation because he believes[pg 164]that its object is to make all good
          things—honour, rewards, and fair women—accessible even to
          cowards.154.Consolation
          amid Perils.—The Greeks, in the course of a life that
          was always surrounded by great dangers and cataclysms, endeavoured
          to find in meditation and knowledge a kind of security of feeling,
          a lastrefugium. We, who live in a much
          more secure state, have introduced danger into meditation and
          knowledge, and it is in life itself that we endeavour to find
          repose, a refuge from danger.155.Extinct
          Scepticism.—Hazardous enterprises are rarer in modern
          times than in antiquity and in the Middle Ages, probably because
          modern times have no more belief in omens, oracles, stars, and
          soothsayers. In other words, we have become incapable of believing
          in a future which is reserved for us, as the ancients did, who—in
          contradistinction to ourselves—were much less sceptical regarding
          that which is to be than that which is.156.Evil through
          Exuberance.—“Oh, that we
          should not feel too happy!”—such was the secret fear of the
          Greeks in their best age.Thatis why they preached
          moderation to themselves. And we?[pg 165]157.The Worship of
          Natural Sounds.—What signification can we find in the
          fact that our culture is not only indulgent to the manifestations
          of grief, such as tears, complaints, reproaches, and attitudes of
          rage and humility, but even approves them and reckons them among
          the most noble and essential things?—while, on the other hand, the
          spirit of ancient philosophy looked down upon them with contempt,
          without admitting their necessity in any way. Let us remember how
          Plato—who was by no means one of the most inhuman of the
          philosophers—speaks of the Philoctetus of the tragic stage. Is it
          possible that our modern culture is wanting in“philosophy”? or, in accordance with the
          valuations of those old philosophers, do we perhaps all form part
          of the“mob”?158.The Climate for
          Flattery.—In our day flatterers should no longer be
          sought at the courts of kings, since these have all acquired a
          taste for militarism, which cannot tolerate flattery. But this
          flower even now often grows in abundance in the neighbourhood of
          bankers and artists.159.The
          Revivers.—Vain men value a fragment of the past more
          highly from the moment when they are able to revive it in their
          imagination (especially if it is difficult to do so), they would[pg 166]even like if
          possible to raise it from the dead. Since, however, the number of
          vain people is always very large, the danger presented by
          historical studies, if an entire epoch devotes its attention to
          them, is by no means small: too great an amount of strength is then
          wasted on all sorts of imaginable resurrections. The entire
          movement of romanticism is perhaps best understood from this point
          of view.160.Vain, Greedy,
          and not very Wise.—Your desires are greater than your
          understanding, and your vanity is even greater than your
          desires,—to people of your type a great deal of Christian practice
          and a little Schopenhauerian theory may be strongly
          recommended.161.Beauty
          corresponding to the Age.—If our sculptors, painters,
          and musicians wish to catch the significance of the age, they
          should represent beauty as bloated, gigantic, and nervous: just as
          the Greeks, under the influence of their morality of moderation,
          saw and represented beauty in the Apollo di Belvedere. We should,
          indeed, call him ugly! But the pedantic“classicists”have deprived us of all our
          honesty!162.The Irony of
          the Present Time.—At the present day it is the habit
          of Europeans to treat all matters of great importance with irony,
          because, as[pg
          167]the result of our activity in their service, we have no time to
          take them seriously.163.Against
          Rousseau.—If it is true that there is something
          contemptible about our civilisation, we have two alternatives: of
          concluding with Rousseau that,“This
          despicable civilisation is to blame for our bad morality,”or to infer, contrary to Rousseau's view, that“Our good morality is to blame for this contemptible
          civilisation. Our social conceptions of good and evil, weak and
          effeminate as they are, and their enormous influence over both body
          and soul, have had the effect of weakening all bodies and souls and
          of crushing all unprejudiced, independent, and self-reliant men,
          the real pillars of a strong civilisation: wherever we still find
          the evil morality to-day, we see the last crumbling ruins of these
          pillars.”Thus let paradox be opposed by paradox! It is
          quite impossible for the truth to lie with both sides: and can we
          say, indeed, that it lies with either? Decide for yourself.164.Perhaps
          Premature.—It would seem at the present time that,
          under many different and misleading names, and often with a great
          want of clearness, those who do not feel themselves attached to
          morals and to established laws are taking the first initial steps
          to organise themselves, and thus to create a right for themselves;
          whilst hitherto,[pg
          168]as criminals, free-thinkers, immoral men and miscreants, they have
          lived beyond the pale of the law, under the bane of outlawry and
          bad conscience, corrupted and corrupting. On the whole, we should
          consider this as right and proper, although it may result in
          insecurity for the coming century and compel every one to bear
          arms.—There is thereby a counterforce which continually reminds us
          that there is no exclusively moral-making morality, and that a
          morality which asserts itself to the exclusion of all other
          morality destroys too much sound strength and is too dearly bought
          by mankind. The non-conventional and deviating people, who are so
          often productive and inventive, must no longer be sacrificed: it
          must never again be considered as a disgrace to depart from
          morality either in actions or thought; many new experiments must be
          made upon life and society, and the world must be relieved from a
          huge weight of bad conscience. These general aims must be
          recognised and encouraged by all those upright people who are
          seeking truth.165.A Morality
          which does not bore one.—The principal moral
          commandments which a nation permits its teachers to emphasise again
          and again stand in relation to its chief defects, and that is why
          it does not find them tiresome. The Greeks, who so often failed to
          employ moderation, coolness, fair-mindedness, and rationality in
          general, turned a willing ear to the four Socratic virtues,—they
          stood[pg 169]in such need of
          them, and yet had so little talent for them!166.At the Parting
          of the Ways.—Shame! You wish to form part of a system
          in which you must be a wheel, fully and completely, or risk being
          crushed by wheels! where it is understood that each one will be
          that which his superiors make of him! where the seeking for“connections”will form part of
          one's natural duties! where no one feels himself offended when he
          has his attention drawn to some one with the remark,“He may be useful to you some time”; where
          people do not feel ashamed of paying a visit to ask for somebody's
          intercession, and where they do not even suspect that by such a
          voluntary submission to these morals, they are once and for all
          stamped as the common pottery of nature, which others can employ or
          break up of their free will without feeling in any way responsible
          for doing so,—just as if one were to say,“People of my type will never be lacking, therefore, do
          what you will with me! Do not stand on ceremony!”167.Unconditional
          Homage.—When I think of the most read German
          philosopher, the most popular German musician, and the most
          distinguished German statesman, I cannot but acknowledge that life
          is now rendered unusually arduous for these Germans, this nation of
          unconditional[pg
          170]sentiments, and that, too, by their own great men. We see three
          magnificent spectacles spread out before us: on each occasion there
          is a river rushing along in the bed which it has made for itself,
          and even so agitated that one thinks at times it intends to flow
          uphill. And yet, however we might admire Schopenhauer, who would
          not, all things considered, like to have other opinions than his?
          Who in all greater and smaller things would now share the opinions
          of Richard Wagner, although there may be truth in the view
          expressed by some one: viz. that wherever Wagner gave or took
          offence some problem lay hidden,—which, however, he did not unearth
          for us. And, finally, how many are there who would be willing and
          eager to agree with Bismarck, if only he could always agree with
          himself, or were even to show some signs of doing so for the
          future! It is true that it is by no means astonishing to find
          statesmen without principles, but with dominant instincts; a
          versatile mind, actuated by these dominant and violent instincts,
          and hence without principles—these qualities are looked upon as
          reasonable and natural in a statesman. But, alas, this has up to
          the present been so un-German; as un-German as the fuss made about
          music and the discord and bad temper excited around the person of
          the musician; or as un-German as the new and extraordinary position
          taken up by Schopenhauer: he did not feel himself to be either
          above things or on his knees before them—one or other of these
          alternatives might still have been German—but he assumed an
          attitude against things! How incredible and disagreeable! to range
          one's self[pg
          171]with things and nevertheless be their adversary, and finally the
          adversary of one's self,—what can the unconditional admirer do with
          such an example? And what, again, can he do with three such
          examples who cannot keep the peace towards one another! Here we see
          Schopenhauer as the antagonist of Wagner's music, Wagner attacking
          Bismarck's politics, and Bismarck attacking Wagnerism and
          Schopenhauerism. What remains for us to do? Where shall we flee
          with our thirst for wholesale hero-worship! Would it not be
          possible to choose from the music of the musician a few hundred
          bars of good music which appealed to the heart, and which we should
          like to take to heart because they are inspired by the heart,—could
          we not stand aside with this small piece of plunder, and forget the
          rest? And could we not make a similar compromise as regards the
          philosopher and the statesman,—select, take to heart, and in
          particular forget the rest?Yes, if only
          forgetfulness were not so difficult! There was once a very proud
          man who would never on any account accept anything, good or evil,
          from others,—from any one, indeed, but himself. When he wanted to
          forget, however, he could not bestow this gift upon himself, and
          was three times compelled to conjure up the spirits. They came,
          listened to his desire, and said at last,“This is the only thing it is not in our power to
          give!”Could not the Germans take warning by this experience
          of Manfred? Why, then, should the spirits be conjured up? It is
          useless. We never forget what we endeavour to forget. And how[pg 172]great would be the“balance”which we should have to
          forget if we wished henceforth to continue wholesale admirers of
          these three great men! It would therefore be far more advisable to
          profit by the excellent opportunity offered us to try something
          new,i.e.to advance in the spirit of
          honesty towards ourselves and become, instead of a nation of
          credulous repetition and of bitter and blind animosity, a people of
          conditional assent and benevolent opposition. We must come to learn
          in the first place, however, that unconditional homage to people is
          something rather ridiculous, that a change of view on this point
          would not discredit even Germans, and that there is a profound and
          memorable saying:“Ce qui importe, ce ne
          sont point les personnes: mais les choses.”This saying is
          like the man who uttered it—great, honest, simple, and silent,—just
          like Carnot, the soldier and Republican. But may I at the present
          time speak thus to Germans of a Frenchman, and a Republican into
          the bargain? Perhaps not: perhaps I must not even recall what
          Niebuhr in his time dared to say to the Germans: that no one had
          made such an impression of true greatness upon him as Carnot.168.A
          Model.—What do I like about Thucydides, and how does
          it come that I esteem him more highly than Plato? He exhibits the
          most wide-spread and artless pleasure in everything typical in men
          and events, and finds that each type is[pg 173]possessed of a certain quantity of good
          sense: it is this good sense which he seeks to discover. He
          likewise exhibits a larger amount of practical justice than Plato;
          he never reviles or belittles those men whom he dislikes or who
          have in any way injured him in the course of his life. On the
          contrary: while seeing only types, he introduces something noble
          and additional into all things and persons; for what could
          posterity, to which he dedicates his work, do with things not
          typical! Thus this culture of the disinterested knowledge of the
          world attains in him, the poet-thinker, a final marvellous
          bloom,—this culture which has its poet in Sophocles, its statesman
          in Pericles, its doctor in Hippocrates, and its natural philosopher
          in Democritus: this culture which deserves to be called by the name
          of its teachers, the Sophists, and which, unhappily, from the
          moment of its baptism at once begins to grow pale and
          incomprehensible to us,—for henceforward we suspect that this
          culture, which was combated by Plato and all the Socratic schools,
          must have been very immoral! The truth of this matter is so
          complicated and entangled that we feel unwilling to unravel it: so
          let the old error (error veritate
          simplicior) run its old course.169.The Greek
          Genius Foreign to us.—Oriental or modern, Asiatic or
          European: compared with the ancient Greeks, everything is
          characterised by enormity of size and by the revelling in great
          masses as the expression of the sublime, whilst in[pg 174]Paestum, Pompeii, and Athens we are
          astonished, when contemplating Greek architecture, to see with what
          small masses the Greeks were able to express the sublime, and how
          they loved to express it thus. In the same way, how simple were the
          Greeks in the idea which they formed of themselves! How far we
          surpass them in the knowledge of man! Again, how full of labyrinths
          would our souls and our conceptions of our souls appear in
          comparison with theirs! If we had to venture upon an architecture
          after the style of our own souls—(we are too cowardly for that!)—a
          labyrinth would have to be our model. That music which is peculiar
          to us, and which really expresses us, lets this be clearly seen!
          (for in music men let themselves go, because they think there is no
          one who can see them hiding behind their music).170.Another Point
          of View.—How we babble about the Greeks! What do we
          understand of their art, the soul of which was the passion for
          naked masculine beauty! It was only by starting therefrom that they
          appreciated feminine beauty. For the latter they had thus a
          perspective quite different from ours. It was the same in regard to
          their love for women: their worship was of a different kind, and so
          also was their contempt.171.The Food of the
          Modern Man.—He has learned to digest many things;
          nay, almost everything;[pg
          175]it is his ambition to do so. He would, however, be really of a
          higher order if he did not understand this so well:homo pamphagusis not the finest
          type of the human race. We live between a past which had a more
          wayward and deranged taste than we, and a future which will
          possibly have a more select taste,—we live too much midway.172.Tragedy and
          Music.—Men of essentially warlike disposition, such,
          for example, as the ancient Greeks in the time of Æschylus, are
          difficult to rouse, and when pity once triumphs over their hardness
          they are seized as by a kind of giddiness or a“demoniacal power,”—they feel themselves
          overpowered and thrilled by a religious horror. After this they
          become sceptical about their condition; but as long as they are in
          it they enjoy the charm of being, as it were, outside themselves,
          and the delight of the marvellous mixed with the bitterest gall of
          suffering: this is the proper kind of drink for fighting
          men,—something rare, dangerous, and bitter-sweet, which does not
          often fall to one's lot.Tragedy appeals
          to souls who feel pity in this way, to those fierce and warlike
          souls which are difficult to overcome, whether by fear or pity, but
          which lose nothing by being softened from time to time. Of what
          use, however, is tragedy to those who are as open to the“sympathetic affections”as the
          sails of a ship to the wind! When at the time of Plato the
          Athenians had become more[pg
          176]softened and sensitive, oh, how far they were still removed from
          the gushing emotions of the inhabitants of our modern towns and
          villages! And yet even then the philosophers were beginning to
          complain of the injurious nature of tragedy. An epoch full of
          danger such as that now beginning, in which bravery and manliness
          are rising in value, will perhaps again harden souls to such an
          extent that they will once more stand in need of tragic poets: but
          in the meantime these are somewhat superfluous, to put it mildly.
          For music, too, a better age may be approaching (it will certainly
          be a more evil age!) when artists will have to make their music
          appeal to strongly individual beings, beings which will have become
          hard and which will be dominated by the gloomy earnestness of their
          own passion; but of what use is music to the little souls of the
          present age which is fast passing away, souls that are too
          unsteady, ill-developed, half-personal, inquisitive, and covetous
          of everything?173.The Flatterers
          of Work.—In the glorification of“work”and the never-ceasing talk about the“blessing of labour,”I see the same
          secretarrière-penséeas I do in the praise bestowed on impersonal acts of a general
          interest, viz. a fear of everything individual. For at the sight of
          work—that is to say, severe toil from morning till night—we have
          the feeling that it is the best police, viz. that it holds every
          one in check and effectively hinders the development of reason, of
          greed, and of desire for[pg
          177]independence. For work uses up an extraordinary proportion of
          nervous force, withdrawing it from reflection, meditation, dreams,
          cares, love, and hatred; it dangles unimportant aims before the
          eyes of the worker and affords easy and regular gratification. Thus
          it happens that a society where work is continually being performed
          will enjoy greater security, and it is security which is now
          venerated as the supreme deity.—And now, horror of horrors! it is
          the“workman”himself who has become
          dangerous; the whole world is swarming with“dangerous individuals,”and behind them follows
          the danger of dangers—theindividuum!174.The Moral
          Fashion of a Commercial Community.—Behind the
          principle of the present moral fashion:“Moral actions are actions performed out of sympathy
          for others,”I see the social instinct of fear, which thus
          assumes an intellectual disguise: this instinct sets forth as its
          supreme, most important, and most immediate principle that life
          shall be relieved of all the dangerous characteristics which it
          possessed in former times, and that every one must help with all
          his strength towards the attainment of this end. It is for that
          reason that only those actions which keep in view the general
          security and the feeling of security of society are called“good.”How little joy must men now
          have in themselves when such a tyranny of fear prescribes their
          supreme moral law, if they make no objection when commanded to turn
          their eyes[pg
          178]from themselves and to look aside from themselves! And yet at the
          same time they have lynx eyes for all distress and suffering
          elsewhere! Are we not, then, with this gigantic intention of ours
          of smoothing down every sharp edge and corner in life, utilising
          the best means of turning mankind into sand! Small, soft, round,
          infinite sand! Is that your ideal, ye harbingers of the“sympathetic affections”? In the
          meantime even the question remains unanswered whether we are of
          more use to our neighbour in running immediately and continually to
          his help,—which for the most part can only be done in a very
          superficial way, as otherwise it would become a tyrannical meddling
          and changing,—or by transforming ourselves into something which our
          neighbour can look upon with pleasure,—something, for example,
          which may be compared to a beautiful, quiet, and secluded garden,
          protected by high walls against storms and the dust of the roads,
          but likewise with a hospitable gate.175.Fundamental
          Basis of a Culture of Traders.—We have now an
          opportunity of watching the manifold growth of the culture of a
          society of which commerce is the soul, just as personal rivalry was
          the soul of culture among the ancient Greeks, and war, conquest,
          and law among the ancient Romans. The tradesman is able to value
          everything without producing it, and to value it according to the
          requirements of the consumer rather than his own personal needs.“How many[pg 179]and what class of people will consume
          this?”is his question of questions. Hence, he instinctively
          and incessantly employs this mode of valuation and applies it to
          everything, including the productions of art and science, and of
          thinkers, scholars, artists, statesmen, nations, political parties,
          and even entire ages: with respect to everything produced or
          created he inquires into the supply and demand in order to estimate
          for himself the value of a thing. This, when once it has been made
          the principle of an entire culture, worked out to its most minute
          and subtle details, and imposed upon every kind of will and
          knowledge, this is what you men of the coming century will be proud
          of,—if the prophets of the commercial classes are right in putting
          that century into your possession! But I have little belief in
          these prophets.Credat Judæus
          Apella—to speak with Horace.176.The Criticism
          of our Ancestors.—Why should we now endure the truth,
          even about the most recent past? Because there is now always a new
          generation which feels itself in contradiction to the past and
          enjoys in this criticism the first-fruits of its sense of power. In
          former times the new generation, on the contrary, wished to base
          itself on the old and began to feel conscious of its power, not
          only in accepting the opinions of its ancestors but, if possible,
          taking them even more seriously. To criticise ancestral authority
          was in former times a vice; but at the present time our idealists
          begin by making it their starting-point.[pg 180]177.To learn
          Solitude.—O ye poor fellows in the great centres of
          the world's politics, ye young and talented men, who, urged on by
          ambition, think it your duty to propound your opinion of every
          event of the day,—for something is always happening,—who, by thus
          making a noise and raising a cloud of dust, mistake yourselves for
          the rolling chariot of history; who, because ye always listen,
          always suit the moment when ye can put in your word or two, thereby
          lose all real productiveness. Whatever may be your desire to
          accomplish great deeds, the deep silence of pregnancy never comes
          to you! The event of the day sweeps you along like straws before
          the wind whilst ye lie under the illusion that ye are chasing the
          event,—poor fellows! If a man wishes to act the hero on the stage
          he must not think of forming part of the chorus; he should not even
          know how the chorus is made up.178.Daily Wear and
          Tear.—These young men are lacking neither in
          character, nor talent, nor zeal, but they have never had sufficient
          time to choose their own path; they have, on the contrary, been
          habituated from the most tender age to have their path pointed out
          to them. At the time when they were ripe enough to be sent into the“desert,”something else was done
          with them. They were turned to account, estranged from themselves,
          and[pg 181]brought up in such a
          way that they became accustomed to be worn out by their daily toil.
          This was imposed on them as a duty, and now they cannot do without
          it; they would not wish it to be otherwise. The only thing that
          cannot be refused to these poor beasts of burden is their“holidays”—such is the name they
          give to this ideal of leisure in an overworked century;“holidays,”in which they may for
          once be idle, idiotic, and childish to their heart's content.179.As little State
          as possible!—All political and economic matters are
          not of such great value that they ought to be dealt with by the
          most talented minds: such a waste of intellect is at bottom worse
          than any state of distress. These matters are, and ever will be,
          the province of smaller minds, and others than the smaller minds
          should not be at the service of this workshop: it would be better
          to let the machinery work itself to pieces again! But as matters
          stand at the present time, when not only do all people believe that
          they must know all about it day by day, but wish likewise to be
          always busy about it, and in so doing neglect their own work, it is
          a great and ridiculous mistake. The price that has to be paid for
          the“public safety”is far too high,
          and, what is maddest of all, we effect the very opposite of“public safety”a fact which our own
          dear century has undertaken to prove, as if this had never been
          proved before! To make society secure against thieves and fire, and
          to render it thoroughly fit for all kinds of trade and[pg 182]traffic, and to transform the State in
          a good and evil sense into a kind of Providence—these aims are low,
          mediocre, and not by any means indispensable; and we should not
          seek to attain them by the aid of the highest means and instruments
          which exist—means which we should reserve precisely for our highest
          and rarest aims! Our epoch, however much it may babble about
          economy, is a spendthrift: it wastes intellect, the most precious
          thing of all.