202.The Care of the
          Health.—We have scarcely begun to devote any
          attention to the physiology of criminals, and yet we have already
          reached the inevitable conclusion that between criminals and madmen
          there is no really essential difference:if we suppose that
          the current moral fashion of thinking is a healthy way of
          thinking. No belief, however, is nowadays more firmly
          believed in than this one, so we should not therefore shrink from
          drawing the inevitable conclusion and treating the criminal like a
          lunatic—above all, not with haughty pitifulness, but with medical
          skill and good will. He may perhaps be in need of a change of air,
          a change of society, or temporary absence: perhaps of solitude and
          new occupations—very well! He may perhaps feel that it would be to
          his advantage to live under surveillance for a short time in order
          thus to obtain protection from himself and from a troublesome
          tyrannical impulse—very well! We should make clear to him the
          possibility and the means of curing him (the extermination,
          transformation, and sublimation of these impulses), and also, in
          the worst cases, the improbability of a cure; and we should offer
          to the incurable criminal, who has become a useless burden to
          himself, the opportunity of committing suicide. While holding this
          in reserve[pg
          206]as an extreme measure of relief, we should neglect nothing which
          would tend above all to restore to the criminal his good courage
          and freedom of spirit; we should free his soul from all remorse, as
          if it were something unclean, and show him how he may atone for a
          wrong which he may have done some one by benefiting some one else,
          perhaps the community at large, in such way that he might even do
          more than balance his previous offence.All this must be
          done with the greatest tact! The criminal must, above all, remain
          anonymous or adopt an assumed name, changing his place of residence
          frequently, so that his reputation and future life may suffer as
          little as possible. At the present time it is true that the man who
          has been injured, apart altogether from the manner in which this
          injury might be redressed, wishes for revenge in addition, and
          applies to the courts that he may obtain it—and this is why our
          dreadful penal laws are still in force: Justice, as it were,
          holding up a pair of shopkeeper's scales and endeavouring to
          balance the guilt by punishment; but can we not take a step beyond
          this? Would it not be a great relief to the general sentiment of
          life if, while getting rid of our belief in guilt, we could also
          get rid of our old craving for vengeance, and gradually come to
          believe that it is a refined wisdom for happy men to bless their
          enemies and to do good to those who have offended them, exactly in
          accordance with the spirit of Christian teaching! Let us free the
          world from this idea of sin, and take care to cast out with it the
          idea of punishment. May these monstrous ideas henceforth live
          banished far from the abodes[pg 207]of men—if, indeed, they must live at all, and
          do not perish from disgust with themselves.Let us not
          forget also, however, that the injury caused to society and to the
          individual by the criminal is of the same species as that caused by
          the sick: for the sick spread cares and ill-humour; they are
          non-productive, consume the earnings of others, and at the same
          time require attendance, doctors, and support, and they really live
          on the time and strength of the healthy. In spite of this, however,
          we should designate as inhuman any one who, for this reason, would
          wish to wreak vengeance on the sick. In past ages, indeed, this was
          actually done: in primitive conditions of society, and even now
          among certain savage peoples, the sick man is treated as a criminal
          and as a danger to the community, and it is believed that he is the
          resting-place of certain demoniacal beings who have entered into
          his body as the result of some offence he has committed—those ages
          and peoples hold that the sick are the guilty!And what of
          ourselves? Are we not yet ripe for the contrary conception? Shall
          we not be allowed to say,“The guilty are
          the sick”? No; the hour for that has not yet come. We still
          lack, above all, those physicians who have learnt something from
          what we have hitherto called practical morals and have transformed
          it into the art and science of healing. We still lack that intense
          interest in those things which some day perhaps may seem not unlike
          the“storm and stress”of those old
          religious ecstasies. The Churches have not yet come into the
          possession of those who look[pg 208]after our health; the study of the body and
          of dietary are not yet amongst the obligatory subjects taught in
          our primary and secondary schools; there are as yet no quiet
          associations of those people who are pledged to one another to do
          without the help of law courts, and who renounce the punishment and
          vengeance now meted out to those who have offended against society.
          No thinker has as yet been daring enough to determine the health of
          society, and of the individuals who compose it, by the number of
          parasites which it can support; and no statesman has yet been found
          to use the ploughshare in the spirit of that generous and tender
          saying,“If thou wilt till the land, till
          it with the plough; then the bird and the wolf, walking behind thy
          plough, will rejoice in thee—all creatures will rejoice in
          thee.”203.Against Bad
          Diet.—Fie upon the meals which people nowadays eat in
          hotels and everywhere else where the well-off classes of society
          live! Even when eminent men of science meet together their tables
          groan under the weight of the dishes, in accordance with the
          principle of the bankers: the principle of too many dishes and too
          much to eat. The result of this is that dinners are prepared with a
          view to their mere appearance rather than the consequences that may
          follow from eating them, and that stimulating drinks are required
          to help in driving away the heaviness in the stomach and in the
          brain. Fie on the dissoluteness and extreme nervousness[pg 209]which must follow
          upon all this! Fie upon the dreams that such repasts bring! Fie
          upon the arts and books which must be the desert of such meals!
          Despite all the efforts of such people their acts will taste of
          pepper and ill-temper, or general weariness! (The wealthy classes
          in England stand in great need of their Christianity in order to be
          able to endure their bad digestions and their headaches.) Finally,
          to mention not only the disgusting but also the more pleasant side
          of the matter, these people are by no means mere gluttons: our
          century and its spirit of activity has more power over the limbs
          than the belly. What then is the meaning of these banquets? They
          represent! What in Heaven's name do they represent? Rank?—no,
          money! There is no rank now! We are all“individuals”! but money now stands for power,
          glory, pre-eminence, dignity, and influence; money at the present
          time acts as a greater or lesser moral prejudice for a man in
          proportion to the amount he may possess. Nobody wishes to hide it
          under a bushel or display it in heaps on a table: hence money must
          have some representative which can be put on the table—so behold
          our banquets!204.Danæ and the
          God of Gold.—Whence arises this excessive impatience
          in our day which turns men into criminals even in circumstances
          which would be more likely to bring about the contrary tendency?
          What induces one man to use false weights, another to set his house
          on fire after[pg
          210]having insured it for more than its value, a third to take part in
          counterfeiting, while three-fourths of our upper classes indulge in
          legalised fraud, and suffer from the pangs of conscience that
          follow speculation and dealings on the Stock Exchange: what gives
          rise to all this? It is not real want,—for their existence is by no
          means precarious; perhaps they have even enough to eat and drink
          without worrying,—but they are urged on day and night by a terrible
          impatience at seeing their wealth pile up so slowly, and by an
          equally terrible longing and love for these heaps of gold. In this
          impatience and love, however, we see re-appear once more that
          fanaticism of the desire for power which was stimulated in former
          times by the belief that we were in the possession of truth, a
          fanaticism which bore such beautiful names that we could dare to be
          inhuman with a good conscience (burning Jews, heretics, and good
          books, and exterminating entire cultures superior to ours, such as
          those of Peru and Mexico). The means of this desire for power are
          changed in our day, but the same volcano is still smouldering,
          impatience and intemperate love call for their victims, and what
          was once done“for the love of God”is now done for the love of money,i.e.for the love of that which at present affords us the highest
          feeling of power and a good conscience.205.The People of
          Israel.—One of the spectacles which the next century
          will invite us to witness is[pg 211]the decision regarding the fate of the
          European Jews. It is quite obvious now that they have cast their
          die and crossed their Rubicon: the only thing that remains for them
          is either to become masters of Europe or to lose Europe, as they
          once centuries ago lost Egypt, where they were confronted with
          similar alternatives. In Europe, however, they have gone through a
          schooling of eighteen centuries such as no other nation has ever
          undergone, and the experiences of this dreadful time of probation
          have benefited not only the Jewish community but, even to a greater
          extent, the individual. As a consequence of this, the
          resourcefulness of the modern Jews, both in mind and soul, is
          extraordinary. Amongst all the inhabitants of Europe it is the Jews
          least of all who try to escape from any deep distress by recourse
          to drink or to suicide, as other less gifted people are so prone to
          do. Every Jew can find in the history of his own family and of his
          ancestors a long record of instances of the greatest coolness and
          perseverance amid difficulties and dreadful situations, an artful
          cunning in fighting with misfortune and hazard. And above all it is
          their bravery under the cloak of wretched submission, their heroicspernere se spernithat
          surpasses the virtues of all the saints.People wished to
          make them contemptible by treating them contemptibly for nearly
          twenty centuries, and refusing them access to all honourable
          positions and dignities, and by pushing them further down into the
          meaner trades—and under this process indeed they have not become
          any cleaner. But contemptible? They have never ceased for a[pg 212]moment from
          believing themselves qualified for the very highest functions, nor
          have the virtues of the suffering ever ceased to adorn them. Their
          manner of honouring their parents and children, the rationality of
          their marriages and marriage customs, distinguishes them amongst
          all Europeans. Besides this, they have been able to create for
          themselves a sense of power and eternal vengeance from the very
          trades that were left to them (or to which they were abandoned).
          Even in palliation of their usury we cannot help saying that,
          without this occasional pleasant and useful torture inflicted on
          their scorners, they would have experienced difficulty in
          preserving their self-respect for so long. For our self-respect
          depends upon our ability to make reprisals in both good and evil
          things. Nevertheless, their revenge never urges them on too far,
          for they all have that liberty of mind, and even of soul, produced
          in men by frequent changes of place, climate, and customs of
          neighbours and oppressors, they possess by far the greatest
          experience in all human intercourse, and even in their passions
          they exercise the caution which this experience has developed in
          them. They are so certain of their intellectual versatility and
          shrewdness that they never, even when reduced to the direst
          straits, have to earn their bread by manual labour as common
          workmen, porters, or farm hands. In their manners we can still see
          that they have never been inspired by chivalric and noble feelings,
          or that their bodies have ever been girt with fine weapons: a
          certain obtrusiveness alternates with a submissiveness which is
          often tender and almost always painful.[pg 213]Now, however,
          that they unavoidably inter-marry more and more year after year
          with the noblest blood of Europe, they will soon have a
          considerable heritage of good intellectual and physical manners, so
          that in another hundred years they will have a sufficiently noble
          aspect not to render themselves, as masters, ridiculous to those
          whom they will have subdued. And this is important! and therefore a
          settlement of the question is still premature. They themselves know
          very well that the conquest of Europe or any act of violence is not
          to be thought of; but they also know that some day or other Europe
          may, like a ripe fruit, fall into their hands, if they do not
          clutch at it too eagerly. In the meantime, it is necessary for them
          to distinguish themselves in all departments of European
          distinction and to stand in the front rank: until they shall have
          advanced so far as to determine themselves what distinction shall
          mean. Then they will be called the pioneers and guides of the
          Europeans whose modesty they will no longer offend.And then where
          shall an outlet be found for this abundant wealth of great
          impressions accumulated during such an extended period and
          representing Jewish history for every Jewish family, this wealth of
          passions, virtues, resolutions, resignations, struggles, and
          conquests of all kinds—where can it find an outlet but in great
          intellectual men and works! On the day when the Jews will be able
          to exhibit to us as their own work such jewels and golden vessels
          as no European nation, with its shorter and less profound
          experience, can or could produce, when Israel shall have changed
          its eternal vengeance into[pg 214]an eternal benediction for Europe: then that
          seventh day will once more appear when old Jehovah may rejoice in
          Himself, in His creation, in His chosen people—and all, all of us,
          will rejoice with Him!206.The Impossible
          Class.—Poverty, cheerfulness, and independence—it is
          possible to find these three qualities combined in one individual;
          poverty, cheerfulness, and slavery—this is likewise a possible
          combination: and I can say nothing better to the workmen who serve
          as factory slaves; presuming that it does not appear to them
          altogether to be a shameful thing to be utilised as they are, as
          the screws of a machine and the stopgaps, as it were, of the human
          spirit of invention. Fie on the thought that merely by means of
          higher wages the essential part of their misery,i.e.their impersonal enslavement, might be removed! Fie, that we should
          allow ourselves to be convinced that, by an increase of this
          impersonality within the mechanical working of a new society, the
          disgrace of slavery could be changed into a virtue! Fie, that there
          should be a regular price at which a man should cease to be a
          personality and become a screw instead! Are you accomplices in the
          present madness of nations which desire above all to produce as
          much as possible, and to be as rich as possible? Would it not be
          your duty to present a counter-claim to them, and to show them what
          large sums of internal value are wasted in the pursuit of such an
          external object?[pg
          215]But where is
          your internal value when you no longer know what it is to breathe
          freely; when you have scarcely any command over your own selves,
          and often feel disgusted with yourselves as with some stale food;
          when you zealously study the newspapers and look enviously at your
          wealthy neighbour, made covetous by the rapid rise and fall of
          power, money, and opinions; when you no longer believe in a
          philosophy in rags, or in the freedom of spirit of a man who has
          few needs; when a voluntary and idyllic poverty without profession
          or marriage, such as should suit the more intellectual ones among
          you, has become for you an object of derision? On the other hand,
          the piping of the Socialistic rat-catchers who wish to inspire you
          with foolish hopes is continually sounding in your ears: they tell
          you to be ready and nothing further, ready from this day to the
          next, so that you wait and wait for something to come from outside,
          though living in all other respects as you lived before—until this
          waiting is at length changed into hunger and thirst and fever and
          madness, and the clay of thebestia
          triumphansat last dawns in all its glory. Every one
          of you should on the contrary say to himself:“It would be better to emigrate and endeavour to become
          a master in new and savage countries, and especially to become
          master over myself, changing my place of abode whenever the least
          sign of slavery threatens me, endeavouring to avoid neither
          adventure nor war, and, if things come to the worst, holding myself
          ready to die: anything rather than continuing in this state of
          disgraceful thraldom, this bitterness, malice and
          rebelliousness!”This would[pg 216]be the proper spirit: the workmen in Europe
          ought to make it clear that their position as a class has become a
          human impossibility, and not merely, as they at present maintain,
          the result of some hard and aimless arrangement of society. They
          should bring about an age of great swarming forth from the European
          beehive such as has never yet been seen, protesting by this
          voluntary and huge migration against machines and capital and the
          alternatives that now threaten them either of becoming slaves of
          the State or slaves of some revolutionary party.May Europe be
          freed from one-fourth of her inhabitants! Both she and they will
          experience a sensation of relief. It is only far in the distance,
          in the undertaking of vast colonisations, that we shall be able to
          observe how much rationality, fairness, and healthy suspicion
          mother Europe has incorporated in her sons—these sons who could no
          longer endure life in the home of the dull old woman, always
          running the danger of becoming as bad-tempered, irritable, and
          pleasure-seeking as she herself. The European virtues will travel
          along with these workmen far beyond the boundaries of Europe; and
          those very qualities which on their native soil had begun to
          degenerate into a dangerous discontent and criminal inclinations
          will, when abroad, be transformed into a beautiful, savage
          naturalness and will be called heroism; so that at last a purer air
          would again be wafted over this old, over-populated, and brooding
          Europe of ours. What would it matter if there was a scarcity of“hands”? Perhaps people would then
          recollect[pg
          217]that they had accustomed themselves to many wants merely because it
          was easy to gratify them—it would be sufficient to unlearn some of
          these wants! Perhaps also Chinamen would be called in, and these
          would bring with them their modes of living and thinking, which
          would be found very suitable for industrious ants. They would also
          perhaps help to imbue this fretful and restless Europe with some of
          their Asiatic calmness and contemplation, and—what is perhaps most
          needful of all—their Asiatic stability.207.The Attitude of
          the Germans to Morality.—A German is capable of great
          things, but he is unlikely to accomplish them, for he obeys
          whenever he can, as suits a naturally lazy intellect. If he is ever
          in the dangerous situation of having to stand alone and cast aside
          his sloth, when he finds it no longer possible to disappear like a
          cipher in a number (in which respect he is far inferior to a
          Frenchman or an Englishman), he shows his true strength: then he
          becomes dangerous, evil, deep, and audacious, and exhibits to the
          light of day that wealth of latent energy which he had previously
          carried hidden in himself, and in which no one, not even himself,
          had ever believed. When in such a case a German obeys himself—it is
          very exceptional for him to do so—he does so with the same
          heaviness, inflexibility, and endurance with which he obeys his
          prince and performs his official duties: so that, as I have said,
          he is then capable of great[pg 218]things which bear no relation to the“weak disposition”he attributes to
          himself.As a rule,
          however, he is afraid of depending upon himself alone, he is afraid
          of taking the initiative: that is why Germany uses up so many
          officials and so much ink. Light-heartedness is a stranger to the
          German; he is too timid for it: but in entirely new situations
          which rouse him from his torpor he exhibits an almost frivolous
          spirit—he then delights in the novelty of his new position as if it
          were some intoxicating drink, and he is, as we know, quite a
          connoisseur in intoxication. It thus happens that the German of the
          present day is almost always frivolous in politics, though even
          here he has the advantage and prejudice of thoroughness and
          seriousness; and, although he may take full advantage of these
          qualities in negotiations with other political powers, he
          nevertheless rejoices inwardly at being able for once in his life
          to feel enthusiastic and capricious, to show his fondness for
          innovations, and to change persons, parties, and hopes as if they
          were masks. Those learned German scholars, who hitherto have been
          considered as the most German of Germans, were and perhaps still
          are as good as the German soldiers on account of their profound and
          almost childish inclination to obey in all external things, and on
          account of being often compelled to stand alone in science and to
          answer for many things: if they can only preserve their proud,
          simple, and patient disposition, and their freedom from political
          madness at those times when the wind changes, we may yet expect
          great things from them—such as they[pg 219]are or such as they were, they are the
          embryonic stage of something higher.So far the
          advantages and disadvantages of the Germans, including even their
          learned men, have been that they were more given to superstition
          and showed greater eagerness to believe than any of the other
          nations; their vices are, and always have been, their drunkenness
          and suicidal inclinations (the latter a proof of the clumsiness of
          their intellect, which is easily tempted to throw away the reins).
          Their danger is to be sought in everything that binds down the
          faculties of reason and unchains the passions (as, for example, the
          excessive use of music and spirits), for the German passion acts
          contrarily to its own advantage, and is as self-destructive as the
          passions of the drunkard. Indeed, German enthusiasm is worth less
          than that of other nations, for it is barren. When a German ever
          did anything great it was done at a time of danger, or when his
          courage was high, with his teeth firmly set and his prudence on the
          alert, and often enough in a fit of generosity.—Intercourse with
          these Germans is indeed advisable, for almost every one of them has
          something to give, if we can only understand how to make him find
          it, or rather recover it (for he is very untidy in storing away his
          knowledge).Well: when
          people of this type occupy themselves with morals, what precisely
          will be the morality that will satisfy them? In the first place,
          they will wish to see idealised in their morals their sincere
          instinct for obedience.“Man must have
          something which he can implicitly obey”—this is a German[pg 220]sentiment, a German
          deduction; it is the basis of all German moral teaching. How
          different is the impression, however, when we compare this with the
          entire morality of the ancient world! All those Greek thinkers,
          however varied they may appear to us, seem to resemble, as
          moralists, the gymnastic teacher who encourages his pupils by
          saying,“Come, follow me! Submit to my
          discipline! Then perhaps you may carry off the prize from all the
          other Greeks.”Personal distinction: such was the virtue of
          antiquity. Submission, obedience, whether public or private: such
          is German virtue. Long before Kant set forth his doctrine of the
          Categorical Imperative, Luther, actuated by the same impulse, said
          that there surely must be a being in whom man could trust
          implicitly—it was his proof of the existence of God; it was his
          wish, coarser and more popular than that of Kant, that people
          should implicitly obey a person and not an idea, and Kant also
          finally took his roundabout route through morals merely that he
          might secure obedience for the person. This is indeed the worship
          of the German, the more so as there is now less worship left in his
          religion.The Greeks and
          Romans had other opinions on these matters, and would have laughed
          at such“there must be a being”: it
          is part of the boldness of their Southern nature to take up a stand
          against“implicit belief,”and to
          retain in their inmost heart a trace of scepticism against all and
          every one, whether God, man, or idea. The thinker of antiquity went
          even further, and saidnil admirari: in this phrase he
          saw reflected all philosophy. A[pg 221]German, Schopenhauer, goes so far in the
          contrary direction as to say:admirari id est
          philosophari. But what if, as happens now and then,
          the German should attain to that state of mind which would enable
          him to perform great things? if the hour of exception comes, the
          hour of disobedience? I do not think Schopenhauer is right in
          saying that the single advantage the Germans have over other
          nations is that there are more atheists among them than elsewhere;
          but I do know this: whenever the German reaches the state in which
          he is capable of great things, he invariably raises himself above
          morals! And why should he not? Now he has something new to do, viz.
          to command—either himself or others! But this German morality of
          his has not taught him how to command! Commanding has been
          forgotten in it.