Book IV.208.A Question of
          Conscience.—“Now,in summa, tell me what this new
          thing is that you want.”—“We no
          longer wish causes to be sinners and effects to be
          executioners.”209.The Utility of
          the strictest Theories.—People are indulgent towards
          a man's moral weaknesses, and in this connection they use a coarse
          sieve, provided that he always professes to hold the most strict
          moral theories. On the other hand, the lives of free-thinking
          moralists have always been examined closely through a microscope,
          in the tacit belief that an error in their lives would be the best
          argument against their disagreeable knowledge.6[pg 224]210.The“Thing in Itself.”—We used to ask
          formerly: What is the ridiculous?—as if there were something above
          and beyond ourselves that possessed the quality of provoking
          laughter, and we exhausted ourselves in trying to guess what it was
          (a theologian even held that it might be“thenaïvetéof
          sin”). At the present time we ask: What is laughter? how
          does it arise? We have considered the point, and finally reached
          the conclusion that there is nothing which is good, beautiful,
          sublime, or evil in itself; but rather that there are conditions of
          soul which lead us to attribute such qualities to things outside
          ourselves and in us. We have taken back their predicates from
          things; or we have at all events recollected that we have merely
          lent the things these predicates. Let us be careful that this
          insight does not cause us to lose the faculty of lending, and that
          we do not become at the same time wealthier and more
          avaricious.211.To those who
          Dream of Immortality.—So you desire the everlasting
          perpetuity of this beautiful consciousness of yourselves? Is it not[pg 225]shameful? Do you
          forget all those other things which would in their turn have to
          supportyoufor all eternity, just as they
          have borne with you up to the present with more than Christian
          patience? Or do you think that you can inspire them with an
          eternally pleasant feeling towards yourself? A single immortal man
          on earth would imbue everyone around him with such a disgust for
          him that a general epidemic of murder and suicide would be brought
          about. And yet, ye petty dwellers on earth, with your narrow
          conceptions of a few thousand little minutes of time, ye would wish
          to be an everlasting burden on this everlasting universal
          existence! Could anything be more impertinent? After all, however,
          let us be indulgent towards a being of seventy years: he has not
          been able to exercise his imagination in conceiving his own“eternal tediousness”—he had not
          time enough for that!212.Wherein we know
          Ourselves.—As soon as one animal sees another it
          mentally compares itself with it; and men of uncivilised ages did
          the same. The consequence is that almost all men come to know
          themselves only as regards their defensive and offensive
          faculties.213.Men whose Lives
          have been Failures.—Some men are built of such stuff
          that society is at liberty to do what it likes with them—they will
          do well in any case, and will not have to complain of[pg 226]having failed in life. Other men are
          formed of such peculiar material—it need not be a particularly
          noble one, but simply rarer—that they are sure to fare ill except
          in one single instance: when they can live according to their own
          designs,—in all other cases the injury has to be borne by society.
          For everything that seems to the individual to be a wasted or
          blighted life, his entire burden of discouragement, powerlessness,
          sickness, irritation, covetousness, is attributed by him to
          society—and thus a heavy, vitiated atmosphere is gradually formed
          round society, or, in the most favourable cases, a
          thundercloud.214.What
          Indulgence!—You suffer, and call upon us to be
          indulgent towards you, even when in your suffering you are unjust
          towards things and men! But what does our indulgence matter! You,
          however, should take greater precautions for your own sake! That's
          a nice way of compensating yourself for your sufferings, by
          imposing still further suffering on your own judgment! Your own
          revenge recoils upon yourselves when you start reviling something:
          you dim your own eyes in this way, and not the eyes of others; you
          accustom yourself to looking at things in the wrong way, and with a
          squint.215.The Morality of
          Victims.—“Enthusiastic
          sacrifice,”“self-immolation”—these are the catch-words of
          your morality, and I willingly believe that[pg 227]you, as you say,“mean it honestly”: but I know you better than
          you know yourselves, if your“honesty”is capable of going arm in arm with
          such a morality. You look down from the heights of this morality
          upon that other sober morality which calls for self-control,
          severity, and obedience; you even go so far as to call it
          egoistic—and you are indeed frank towards yourselves in saying that
          it displeases you—it must displease you! For, in sacrificing and
          immolating yourselves with such enthusiasm, you delight in the
          intoxication of the thought that you are now one with the powerful
          being, God or man, to whom you are consecrating yourselves: you
          revel in the feeling of his power, which is again attested by this
          sacrifice.In reality,
          however, you onlyappearto sacrifice yourselves;
          for your imagination turns you into gods and you enjoy yourselves
          as such. Judged from the point of view of this enjoyment, how poor
          and feeble must that other“egoistic”morality of obedience, duty, and
          reason seem to you: it is displeasing to you because in this
          instance true self-sacrifice and self-surrender are called for,
          without the victim thinking himself to be transformed into a god,
          as you do. In a word, you want intoxication and excess, and this
          morality which you despise takes up a stand against intoxication
          and excess—no wonder it causes you some displeasure!216.Evil People and
          Music.—Should the full bliss of love, which consists
          in unlimited confidence,[pg
          228]ever have fallen to the lot of persons other than those who are
          profoundly suspicious, evil, and bitter? For such people enjoy in
          this bliss the gigantic, unlooked-for, and incredibleexceptionof their souls! One day
          they are seized with that infinite, dreamy sensation which is
          entirely opposed to the remainder of their private and public life,
          like a delicious enigma, full of golden splendour, and impossible
          to be described by mere words or similes. Implicit confidence makes
          them speechless—there is even a species of suffering and heaviness
          in this blissful silence; and this is why souls that are overcome
          with happiness generally feel more grateful to music than others
          and better ones do: for they see and hear through music, as through
          a coloured mist, their love becoming, as it were, more distant,
          more touching, and less heavy. Music is the only means that such
          people have of observing their extraordinary condition and of
          becoming aware of its presence with a feeling of estrangement and
          relief. When the sound of music reaches the ears of every lover he
          thinks:“It speaks of me, it speaks in my
          stead; it knows everything!”217.The
          Artist.—The Germans wish to be transported by the
          artist into a state of dreamy passion; by his aid the Italians wish
          to rest from their real passions; the French wish him to give them
          an opportunity of showing their judgment and of making speeches. So
          let us be just![pg 229]218.To deal like an
          Artist with One's Weaknesses.—If we must positively
          have weaknesses and come in the end to look upon them as laws
          beyond ourselves, I wish that everybody may be possessed of as much
          artistic capacity as will enable him to set off his virtues by
          means of his weaknesses, and to make us, through his weaknesses,
          desirous of acquiring his virtues: a power which great musicians
          have possessed in quite an exceptional degree. How frequently do we
          notice in Beethoven's music a coarse, dogmatic, and impatient tone;
          in Mozart, the joviality of an honest man, whose heart and mind
          have not overmuch to give us; in Richard Wagner, an abrupt and
          aggressive restlessness, in the midst of which, just as the most
          patient listener is on the point of losing his temper, the composer
          regains his powers, and likewise the others. Through their very
          weaknesses, these musicians have created in us an ardent desire for
          their virtues, and have given us a palate which is ten times more
          sensitive to every note of this tuneful intellect, tuneful beauty,
          and tuneful goodness.219.Deceit in
          Humiliation.—By your foolishness you have done a
          great wrong to your neighbour and destroyed his happiness
          irretrievably—and then, having overcome your vanity, you humble
          yourself before him, surrender your foolishness to his contempt,
          and fancy that, after this difficult[pg 230]scene, which is an exceedingly painful one
          for you, everything has been set right, that your own voluntary
          loss of honour compensates your neighbour for the injury you have
          done to his happiness. With this feeling you take your leave
          comforted, believing that your virtue has been re-established.Your neighbour,
          however, suffers as intensely as before. He finds nothing to
          comfort him in the fact that you have been irrational and have told
          him so: on the contrary, he remembers the painful appearance you
          presented to him when you were disparaging yourself in his
          presence—it is as if another wound had been inflicted on him. He
          does not think of revenging himself, however; and cannot conceive
          how a proper balance can be struck between you and him. In point of
          fact, you have been acting that scene for yourself and before
          yourself: you invited a witness to be present, not on his account,
          but on your own—don't deceive yourself!220.Dignity and
          Timidity.—Ceremonies, official robes and court
          dresses, grave countenances, solemn aspects, the slow pace,
          involved speech—everything, in short, known as dignity—are all
          pretences adopted by those who are timid at heart: they wish to
          make themselves feared (themselves or the things they represent).
          The fearless (i.e.originally those who
          naturally inspire others with awe) have no need of dignity and
          ceremonies: they bring into repute—or, still more, into
          ill-repute—honesty and straightforward words and bearing,[pg 231]as characteristics
          of their self-confident awefulness.221.The Morality of
          Sacrifice.—The morality which is measured by the
          spirit of sacrifice is that of a semi-civilised state of society.
          Reason in this instance gains a hard-fought and bloody victory
          within the soul; for there are powerful contrary instincts to be
          overcome. This cannot be brought about without the cruelty which
          the sacrifices to cannibal gods demand.222.Where
          Fanaticism is to be Desired.—Phlegmatic natures can
          be rendered enthusiastic only by being fanaticised.223.The Dreaded
          Eye.—Nothing is dreaded more by artists, poets, and
          writers than the eye which sees through their little deceptions and
          subsequently notices how often they have stopped at the boundary
          where the paths branch off either to innocent delight in themselves
          or to the straining after effect; the eye which checks them when
          they try to sell little things dear, or when they try to exalt and
          adorn without being exalted themselves; the eye which, despite all
          the artifices of their art, sees the thought as it first presented
          itself to them, perhaps as a charming vision of light, perhaps
          also, however, as a theft from the whole world, or as an everyday
          conception which they had to expand, contract,[pg 232]colour, wrap up, and spice, in order to
          make something out of it, instead of the thought making something
          out of them.—Oh, this eye, which sees in your work all your
          restlessness, inquisitiveness, and covetousness, your imitation and
          exaggeration (which is only envious imitation) which knows both
          your blush of shame and your skill in concealing it from others and
          interpreting it to yourselves!224.The“Edifying”Element in our Neighbour's
          Misfortune.—He is in distress, and straightway the“compassionate”ones come to him and
          depict his misfortune to him. At last they go away again, satisfied
          and elevated, after having gloated over the unhappy man's
          misfortune and their own, and spent a pleasant Sunday
          afternoon.225.To be quickly
          Despised.—A man who speaks a great deal, and speaks
          quickly, soon sinks exceedingly low in our estimation, even when he
          speaks rationally—not only to the extent that he annoys us
          personally, but far lower. For we conjecture how great a burden he
          has already proved to many other people, and we thus add to the
          discomfort which he causes us all the contempt which we presume he
          has caused to others.226.Relations with
          Celebrities.—A.But why do you shun this
          great man?—B.I should not like[pg 233]to misunderstand
          him. Our defects are incompatible with one another: I am
          short-sighted and suspicious, and he wears his false diamonds as
          willingly as his real ones.227.The
          Chain-Wearers.—Beware of all those intellects which
          are bound in chains! clever women, for example, who have been
          banished by fate to narrow and dull surroundings, amid which they
          grow old. True, there they lie in the sun, apparently lazy and
          half-blind; but at every unknown step, at everything unexpected,
          they start up to bite: they revenge themselves on everything that
          has escaped their kennel.228.Revenge in
          Praise.—Here we have a written page which is covered
          with praise, and you call it flat; but when you find out that
          revenge is concealed in this praise you will find it almost too
          subtle, and you will experience a great deal of pleasure in its
          numerous delicate and bold strokes and similes. It is not the man
          himself, but his revenge, which is so subtle, rich, and ingenious:
          he himself is scarcely aware of it.229.Pride.—Ah, not one of you
          knows the feeling of the tortured man after he has been put to the
          torture, when he is being carried back to his cell, and his secret
          with him!—he still holds it in a stubborn and tenacious grip. What
          know ye of the exultation of human pride?[pg 234]230.“Utilitarian.”—At the present
          time men's sentiments on moral things run in such labyrinthic paths
          that, while we demonstrate morality to one man by virtue of its
          utility, we refute it to another on account of this utility.231.On German
          Virtue.—How degenerate in its taste, how servile to
          dignities, ranks, uniforms, pomp, and splendour must a nation have
          been, when it began to consider the simple as the bad, the simple
          man (schlicht) as
          the bad man (schlecht)! We
          should always oppose the moral bumptiousness of the Germans with
          this one little word“bad,”and
          nothing else.232.From a
          Dispute.—A.Friend, you have talked
          yourself hoarse.—B.Then I am refuted, so let's
          drop the subject.233.The“Conscientious”Ones.—Have you noticed the
          kind of men who attach the greatest value to the most scrupulous
          conscientiousness? Those who are conscious of many mean and petty
          sentiments, who are anxiously thinking of and about themselves, are
          afraid of others, and are desirous of concealing their inmost
          feelings as far as possible. They endeavour to impose upon
          themselves by means of this strict conscientiousness[pg 235]and rigorousness of duty, and by the
          stern and harsh impression which others, especially their
          inferiors, cannot fail to receive of them.234.Dread of
          Fame.—A.The endeavour to avoid one's
          renown, the intentional offending of one's panegyrists, the dislike
          of hearing opinions about one's self, and all through fear of
          renown: instances like these are to be met with; they actually
          exist—believe it or not!—B.They are found, no doubt!
          They exist! A little patience, Sir Arrogance!235.Refusing
          Thanks.—We are perfectly justified in refusing a
          request, but it is never right to refuse thanks—or, what comes to
          the same thing, to accept them coldly and conventionally. This
          gives deep offence—and why?236.Punishment.—A strange
          thing, this punishment of ours! It does not purify the criminal; it
          is not a form of expiation; but, on the contrary, it is even more
          defiling than the crime itself.237.Party
          Grievances.—In almost every party there is a
          ridiculous, but nevertheless somewhat dangerous grievance. The
          sufferers from it are those who have long been the faithful and
          honourable upholders of the doctrine propagated by the[pg 236]party, and who suddenly remark that one
          day a much stronger figure than themselves has got the ear of the
          public. How can they bear being reduced to silence? So they raise
          their voices, sometimes changing their notes.238.Striving for
          Gentleness.—When a vigorous nature has not an
          inclination towards cruelty, and is not always preoccupied with
          itself; it involuntarily strives after gentleness—this is its
          distinctive characteristic. Weak natures, on the other hand, have a
          tendency towards harsh judgments—they associate themselves with the
          heroes of the contempt of mankind, the religious or philosophical
          traducers of existence, or they take up their position behind
          strict habits and punctilious“callings”: in this way they seek to give
          themselves a character and a kind of strength. This is likewise
          done quite involuntarily.239.A Hint to
          Moralists.—Our musicians have made a great discovery.
          They have found out that interesting ugliness is possible even in
          their art; this is why they throw themselves with such enthusiastic
          intoxication into this ocean of ugliness, and never before has it
          been so easy to make music. It is only now that we have got the
          general, dark-coloured background, upon which every luminous ray of
          fine music, however faint, seems tinged with golden emerald lustre;
          it is only now that we dare to inspire our audience with feelings[pg 237]of impetuosity and
          indignation, taking away their breath, so to speak, in order that
          we may afterwards, in an interval of restful harmony, inspire them
          with a feeling of bliss which will be to the general advantage of a
          proper appreciation of music.We have
          discovered the contrast: it is only now that the strongest effects
          are possible—and cheap. No one bothers any more about good music.
          But you must hurry up! When any art has once made this discovery,
          it has but a short space of time to live.—Oh, if only our thinkers
          could probe into the depths of the souls of our musicians when
          listening to their music! How long we must wait until we again have
          an opportunity of surprising the inward man in the very act of his
          evil doing, and his innocence of this act! For our musicians have
          not the slightest suspicion that it is their own history, the
          history of the disfigurement of the soul, which they are
          transposing into music. In former times a good musician was almost
          forced by the exigencies of his art to become a good man—and
          now!240.The Morality of
          the Stage.—The man who imagines that the effect of
          Shakespeare's plays is a moral one, and that the sight of Macbeth
          irresistibly induces us to shun the evil of ambition, is mistaken,
          and he is mistaken once more if he believes that Shakespeare
          himself thought so. He who is truly obsessed by an ardent ambition
          takes delight in beholding this picture of himself; and when the
          hero is driven to destruction by his passion, this is[pg 238]the most pungent spice in the hot drink
          of this delight. Did the poet feel this in another way? How royally
          and with how little of the knave in him does his ambitious hero run
          his course from the moment of his great crime! It is only from this
          moment that he becomes“demoniacally”attractive, and that he
          encourages similar natures to imitate him.—There is something
          demoniacal here: something which is in revolt against advantage and
          life, in favour of a thought and an impulse. Do you think that
          Tristan and Isolde are warnings against adultery, merely because
          adultery has resulted in the death of both of them? This would be
          turning poets upside down, these poets who, especially Shakespeare,
          are in love with the passions in themselves, and not less so with
          the readiness for death which they give rise to: this mood in which
          the heart no more clings to life than a drop of water does to the
          glass. It is not the guilt and its pernicious consequences which
          interests these poets—Shakespeare as little as Sophocles (in theAjax,Philoctetes,Œdipus)—however easy it might
          have been in the cases just mentioned to make the guilt the lever
          of the play, it was carefully avoided by the poets.In the same way
          the tragic poet by his images of life does not wish to set us
          against life. On the contrary, he exclaims;“It is the charm of charms, this exciting, changing,
          and dangerous existence of ours, so often gloomy and so often
          bathed in sun! Life is an adventure—whichever side you may take in
          life it will always retain this character!”—Thus speaks the
          poet of a restless and vigorous age, an age which is almost
          intoxicated and[pg
          239]stupefied by its superabundance of blood and energy, in an age more
          evil than our own: and this is why it is necessary for us to adapt
          and accommodate ourselves first to the purpose of a Shakespearian
          play, that is, by misunderstanding it.241.Fear and
          Intelligence.—If that which is now expressly
          maintained is true, viz. that the cause of the black pigment of the
          skin must not be sought in light, might this phenomenon perhaps be
          the ultimate effect of frequent fits of passion accumulated for
          century after century (and an afflux of blood under the skin)?
          while in other and more intelligent races the equally frequent
          spasms of fear and blanching may have resulted in the white colour
          of the skin?—For the degree of timidity is the standard by which
          the intelligence may be measured; and the fact that men give
          themselves up to blind anger is an indication that their animal
          nature is still near the surface, and is longing for an opportunity
          to make its presence felt once more. Thus a brownish-grey would
          probably be the primitive colour of man—something of the ape and
          the bear, as is only proper.242.Independence.—Independence
          (which in its weakest form is called“freedom of thought”) is the type of resignation
          which the tyrannical man ends by accepting—he who for a long time
          had[pg 240]been looking for
          something to govern, but without finding anything except
          himself.243.The two
          Courses.—When we endeavour to examine the mirror in
          itself we discover in the end that we can detect nothing there but
          the things which it reflects. If we wish to grasp the things
          reflected we touch nothing in the end but the mirror.—This is the
          general history of knowledge.244.Delight in
          Reality.—Our present inclination to take delight in
          reality—for almost every one of us possesses it—can only be
          explained by the fact that we have taken delight in the unreal for
          such a long time that we have got tired of it. This inclination in
          its present form, without choice and without refinement, is not
          without danger—its least danger is its want of taste.245.The Subtlety of
          the Feeling of Power.—Napoleon was greatly mortified
          at the fact that he could not speak well, and he did not deceive
          himself in this respect: but his thirst for power, which never
          despised the slightest opportunity of showing itself, and which was
          still more subtle than his subtle intellect, led him to speak even
          worse than he might have done. It was in this way that he revenged
          himself upon his own mortification (he was jealous[pg 241]of all his emotions because they
          possessed power) in order to enjoy his autocratic pleasure.He enjoyed this
          pleasure a second time in respect to the ears and judgment of his
          audience, as if it were good enough for them to be addressed in
          this way. He even secretly enjoyed the thought of bewildering their
          judgment and good taste by the thunder and lightning of his highest
          authority—that authority which lies in the union of power and
          genius—while both his judgment and his good taste held fast proudly
          and indifferently to the truth that he did not speak
          well.—Napoleon, as the complete and fully developed type of a
          single instinct, belongs to ancient humanity, whose
          characteristic—the simple construction and ingenious development
          and realisation of a single motive or a small number of motives—may
          be easily enough recognised.246.Aristotle and
          Marriage.—Insanity makes its appearance in the
          children of great geniuses, and stupidity in those of the most
          virtuous—so says Aristotle. Did he mean by this to invite
          exceptional men to marry?247.The Origin of a
          bad Temperament.—Injustice and instability in the
          minds of certain men, their disordered and immoderate manner, are
          the ultimate consequences of the innumerable logical inexactitudes,
          superficialities, and hasty conclusions of which their ancestors
          have been guilty. Men of a good temperament, on the other hand, are
          descended[pg
          242]from solid and meditative races which have set a high value upon
          reason—whether for praiseworthy or evil purposes is of no great
          importance.248.Dissimulation
          as a Duty.—Kindness has been best developed by the
          long dissimulation which endeavoured to appear as kindness:
          wherever great power existed the necessity for dissimulation of
          this nature was recognised—it inspires security and confidence, and
          multiplies the actual sum of our physical power. Falsehood, if not
          actually the mother, is at all events the nurse of kindness. In the
          same way, honesty has been brought to maturity by the need for a
          semblance of honesty and integrity: in hereditary aristocracies.
          The persistent exercise of such a dissimulation ends by bringing
          about the actual nature of the thing itself: the dissimulation in
          the long run suppresses itself, and organs and instincts are the
          unexpected fruits in this garden of hypocrisy.