249.Who, then, is
          ever Alone.—The faint-hearted wretch does not know
          what it means to be lonely. An enemy is always prowling in his
          tracks. Oh, for the man who could give us the history of that
          subtle feeling called loneliness!250.Night and
          Music.—It was only at night time, and in the
          semi-obscurity of dark forests and caverns, that the ear, the organ
          of fear, was able to[pg
          243]develop itself so well, in accordance with the mode of living of
          the timid—that is, the longest human epoch which has ever yet
          existed: when it is clear daylight the ear is less necessary. Hence
          the character of music, which is an art of night and twilight.251.Stoical.—The Stoic
          experiences a certain sense of cheerfulness when he feels oppressed
          by the ceremonial which he has prescribed for himself: he enjoys
          himself then as a ruler.252.Consider.—The man who is
          being punished is no longer he who has done the deed. He is always
          the scapegoat.253.Appearance.—Alas! what
          must be best and most resolutely proved is appearance itself; for
          only too many people lack eyes to observe it. But it is so
          tiresome!254.Those who
          Anticipate.—What distinguishes poetic natures, but is
          also a danger for them, is their imagination, which exhausts itself
          in advance: which anticipates what will happen or what may happen,
          which enjoys and suffers in advance, and which at the final moment
          of the event or the action is already fatigued. Lord Byron, who was
          only too familiar with this, wrote in his diary:“If ever[pg
          244]I
          have a son he shall choose a very prosaic profession—that of a
          lawyer or a pirate.”255.Conversation on
          Music.—A.What
          do you say to that music?B.It
          has overpowered me, I can say nothing about it. Listen! there it is
          beginning again.A.All
          the better! This time let us do our best to overpower it. Will you
          allow me to add a few words to this music? and also to show you a
          drama which perhaps at your first hearing you did not wish to
          observe?B.Very
          well, I have two ears and even more if necessary; move up closer to
          me.A.We
          have not yet heard what he wishes to say to us, up to the present
          he has only promised to say something—something as yet unheard, so
          he gives us to understand by his gestures, for they are gestures.
          How he beckons! How he raises himself up! How he gesticulates! and
          now the moment of supreme tension seems to have come to him: two
          more fanfares, and he will present us with his superb and
          splendidly-adorned theme, rattling, as it were, with precious
          stones.Is it a handsome
          woman? or a beautiful horse? Enough, he looks about him as if
          enraptured, for he must assemble looks of rapture. It is only now
          that his theme quite pleases him: it is only now that he becomes
          inventive and risks new and audacious features. How he forces out
          his theme! Ah, take care!—he not only understands how to[pg 245]adorn, but also how
          to gloss it over! Yes, he knows what the colour of health is, and
          he knows how to make it up,—he is more subtle in his
          self-consciousness than I thought. And now he is convinced that he
          has convinced his hearers; he sets off his impromptus as if they
          were the most important things under the sun: he points to his
          theme with an insolent finger as if it were too good for this
          world.—Ah, how distrustful he is! He is afraid we may get
          tired!—that is why he buries his melody in sweet notes.—Now he even
          appeals to our coarser senses that he may excite us and thus get us
          once again into his power. Listen to him as he conjures up the
          elementary force of tempestuous and thundering rhythms!And now that he
          sees that these things have captivated our attention, strangle us,
          and almost overwhelm us, he once again ventures to introduce his
          theme amidst this play of the elements in order to convince us,
          confused and agitated as we are, that our confusion and agitation
          are the effects of his miraculous theme. And from now onwards his
          hearers believe in him: as soon as the theme is heard once more
          they are reminded of its thrilling elementary effects. The theme
          profits by this recollection—now it has become demoniacal! What a
          connoisseur of the soul he is! He gains command over us by all the
          artifices of the popular orator. But the music has stopped
          again.B.And
          I am glad of it; for I could no longer bear listening to your
          observations! I should prefer ten times over to let myself be
          deceived to knowing the truth once after your
          version.[pg
          246]A.That
          is just what I wished to hear from you. The best people now are
          just like you: you are quite content to let yourselves be deceived.
          You come here with coarse, lustful ears, and you do not bring with
          you your conscience of the art of listening. On the way here you
          have cast away your intellectual honesty, and thus you corrupt both
          art and artists. Whenever you applaud and cheer you have in your
          hands the conscience of the artists—and woe to art if they get to
          know that you cannot distinguish between innocent and guilty music!
          I do not indeed refer to“good”and“bad”music—we meet with both in the
          two kinds of music mentioned! but I call innocent music that which
          thinks only of itself and believes only in itself, and which on
          account of itself has forgotten the world at large—this spontaneous
          expression of the most profound solitude which speaks of itself and
          with itself, and has entirely forgotten that there are listeners,
          effects, misunderstandings and failures in the world outside. In
          short, the music which we have just heard is precisely of this rare
          and noble type; and everything I said about it was a fable—pardon
          my little trick if you will!B.Oh,
          then you likethismusic, too? In that case many
          sins shall be forgiven you!256.The Happiness
          of the Evil Ones.—These silent, gloomy, and evil men
          possess a peculiar something which you cannot dispute with them—an[pg 247]uncommon and strange
          enjoyment in thedolce far niente; a sunset and
          evening rest, such as none can enjoy but a heart which has been too
          often devoured, lacerated, and poisoned by the passions.257.Words Present
          in our Minds.—We always express our thoughts with
          those words which lie nearest to hand. Or rather, if I may reveal
          my full suspicion; at every moment we have only the particular
          thought for the words that are present in our minds.258.Flattering the
          Dog.—You have only to stroke this dog's coat once,
          and he immediately splutters and gives off sparks like any other
          flatterer—and he is witty in his own way. Why should we not endure
          him thus?259.The Quondam
          Panegyrist.—“He has now
          become silent now in regard to me, although he knows the truth and
          could tell it; but it would sound like vengeance—and he values
          truth so highly, this honourable man!”260.The Amulet of
          Dependent Men.—He who is unavoidably dependent upon
          some master ought to possess something by which he can inspire his
          master with fear, and keep him in check: integrity, for example, or
          probity, or an evil tongue.[pg 248]261.Why so
          Sublime!—Oh, I know them well this breed of animals!
          Certainly it pleases them better to walk on two legs“like a god”—but it pleases me better when they
          fall back on their four feet. This is incomparably more natural for
          them!262.The Demon of
          Power.—Neither necessity nor desire, but the love of
          power, is the demon of mankind. You may give men everything
          possible—health, food, shelter, enjoyment—but they are and remain
          unhappy and capricious, for the demon waits and waits; and must be
          satisfied. Let everything else be taken away from men, and let this
          demon be satisfied, and then they will nearly be happy—as happy as
          men and demons can be; but why do I repeat this? Luther has already
          said it, and better than I have done, in the verses:“And
                though they take our life,Goods, honour, children,
                wife,Yet is their profit
                small,These things shall vanish
                all,The Kingdom it remaineth.”The Kingdom!
          there it is again!7263.Contradiction
          Incarnate and Animated.—There is a physiological
          contradiction in what is[pg
          249]called genius: genius possesses on the one hand a great deal of
          savage disorder and involuntary movement, and on the other hand a
          great deal of superior activity in this movement. Joined to this a
          genius possesses a mirror which reflects the two movements beside
          one another, and within one another, but often opposed to one
          another. Genius in consequence of this sight is often unhappy, and
          if it feels its greatest happiness in creating, it is because it
          forgets that precisely then, with the highest determinate activity,
          it does something fantastic and irrational (such is all art) and
          cannot help doing it.264.Deceiving One's
          Self.—Envious men with a discriminating intuition
          endeavour not to become too closely acquainted with their rivals in
          order that they may feel themselves superior to them.265.There is a Time
          for the Theatre.—When the imagination of a people
          begins to diminish, there arises the desire to have its legends
          represented on the stage: it then tolerates the coarse substitutes
          for imagination. In the age of the epic rhapsodist, however, the
          theatre itself, and the actor dressed up as a hero, form an
          obstacle in the path of the imagination instead of acting as wings
          for it—too near, too definite, too heavy, and with too little of
          dreamland and the flights of birds about them.[pg 250]266.Without
          Charm.—He lacks charm and knows it. Ah, how skilful
          he is in masking this defect! He does it by a strict virtue, gloomy
          looks, and acquired distrust of all men, and of existence itself;
          by coarse jests, by contempt for a more refined manner of living,
          by pathos and pretensions, and by a cynical philosophy—yea, he has
          even developed into a character through the continual knowledge of
          his deficiency.267.Why so
          Proud?—A noble character is distinguished from a
          vulgar one by the fact that the latter has not at ready command a
          certain number of habits and points of view like the former: fate
          willed that they should not be his either by inheritance or by
          education.268.The Orator's
          Scylla and Charybdis.—How difficult it was in Athens
          to speak in such a way as to win over the hearers to one's cause
          without repelling them at the same time by the form in which one's
          speech was cast, or withdrawing their attention from the cause
          itself by this form! How difficult it still is to write thus in
          France!269.Sick People and
          Art.—For all kinds of sadness and misery of soul we
          should first of all try[pg
          251]a
          change of diet and severe manual labour; but in such cases men are
          in the habit of having recourse to mental intoxicants, to art for
          example—which is both to their own detriment and that of art! Can
          you not see that when you call for art as sick people you make the
          artists themselves sick?270.Apparent
          Toleration.—Those are good, benevolent, and rational
          words on and in favour of science, but, alas! I see behind these
          words your toleration of science. In a corner of your inmost mind
          you think, in spite of all you say, thatit is not necessary
          for you, that it shows magnanimity on your part to
          admit and even to advocate it, more especially as science on its
          part does not exhibit this magnanimity in regard to your opinion!
          Do you know that you have no right whatever to exercise this
          toleration? that this condescension of yours is an even coarser
          disparagement of science than any of that open scorn which a
          presumptuous priest or artist might allow himself to indulge in
          towards science? What is lacking in you is a strong sense for
          everything that is true and actual, you do not feel grieved and
          worried to find that science is in contradiction to your own
          sentiments, you are unacquainted with that intense desire for
          knowledge ruling over you like a law, you do not feel a duty in the
          need of being present with your own eyes wherever knowledge exists,
          and to let nothing that is“known”escape you. You do not know that which you are treating with such
          toleration! and[pg
          252]it is only because you do not know it that you can succeed in
          adopting such a gracious attitude towards it. You, forsooth, would
          look upon science with hatred and fanaticism if it for once cast
          its shining and illuminating glance upon you! What does it matter
          to us, then, if you do exhibit toleration—and towards a phantom!
          and not even towards us!—and what do we matter!271.Festive
          Moods.—It is exactly those men who aspire most
          ardently towards power who feel it indescribably agreeable to be
          overpowered! to sink suddenly and deeply into a feeling as into a
          whirlpool! To suffer the reins to be snatched out of their hand,
          and to watch a movement which takes them they know not where!
          Whatever or whoever may be the person or thing that renders us this
          service, it is nevertheless a great service: we are so happy and
          breathless, and feel around us an exceptional silence, as if we
          were in the most central bowels of the earth. To be for once
          entirely powerless! the plaything of the elementary forces of
          nature! There is a restfulness in this happiness, a casting away of
          the great burden, a descent without fatigue, as if one had been
          given up to the blind force of gravity.This is the
          dream of the mountain climber, who, although he sees his goal far
          above him, nevertheless falls asleep on the way from utter
          exhaustion, and dreams of the happiness of the contrast—this
          effortless rolling down hill. I describe happiness[pg 253]as I imagine it to be in our
          present-day society, the badgered, ambitious society of Europe and
          America. Now and then theywishto fall back into
          impotence—this enjoyment is offered them by wars, arts, religions,
          and geniuses. When a man has temporarily abandoned himself to a
          momentary impression which devours and crushes everything—and this
          is the modern festive mood—he afterwards becomes freer, colder,
          more refreshed, and more strict, and again strives tirelessly after
          the contrary of all this: power.272.The
          Purification of Races.—It is probable that there are
          no pure races, but only races which have become purified, and even
          these are extremely rare.8We more
          often meet with crossed races, among whom, together with the
          defects in the harmony of the bodily forms (for example when the
          eyes do not accord with the mouth) we necessarily always find
          defects of harmony in habits and appreciations. (Livingstone heard
          some one say,“God created white and black
          men, but the devil created the half-castes.”)Crossed races
          are always at the same time crossed[pg 254]cultures and crossed moralities: they are, as
          a rule, more evil, cruel, and restless. Purity is the final result
          of innumerable adjustments, absorptions, and eliminations; and
          progress towards purity in a race is shown by the fact that the
          latent strength in the race is more and more restricted to a few
          special functions, whilst it formerly had to carry out too many and
          often contradictory things. Such a restriction will always have the
          appearance of an impoverishment, and must be judged with prudence
          and moderation. In the long run, however, when the process of
          purification has come to a successful termination, all those forces
          which were formerly wasted in the struggle between the
          disharmonious qualities are at the disposal of the organism as a
          whole, and this is why purified races have always become stronger
          and more beautiful.—The Greeks may serve us as a model of a
          purified race and culture!—and it is to be hoped that some day a
          pure European race and culture may arise.273.Praise.—Here is some one
          who, you perceive, wishes to praise you: you bite your lips and
          brace up your heart: Oh, thatthatcup might go hence! But it
          does not, it comes! let us therefore drink the sweet impudence of
          the panegyrist, let us overcome the disgust and profound contempt
          that we feel for the innermost substance of his praise, let us
          assume a look of thankful joy—for he wished to make himself
          agreeable to us! And now that it is all over we know[pg 255]that he feels greatly exalted; he has
          been victorious over us. Yes, and also over himself, the
          villain!—for it was no easy matter for him to wring this praise
          from himself.274.The Rights and
          Privileges of Man.—We human beings are the only
          creatures who, when things do not go well with us, can blot
          ourselves out like a clumsy sentence,—whether we do so out of
          honour for humanity or pity for it, or on account of the aversion
          we feel towards ourselves.275.The Transformed
          Being.—Now he becomes virtuous; but only for the sake
          of hurting others by being so. Don't pay so much attention to
          him.276.How Often! How
          Unexpected!—How may married men have some morning
          awakened to the fact that their young wife is dull, although she
          thinks quite the contrary! not to speak of those wives whose flesh
          is willing but whose intellect is weak!277.Warm and Cold
          Virtues.—Courage is sometimes the consequence of cold
          and unshaken resolution, and at other times of a fiery and reckless
          élan. For these two kinds of courage there is only the one
          name!—but how different, nevertheless,[pg 256]are cold virtues and warm virtues! and the
          man would be a fool who could suppose that“goodness”could only be brought about by
          warmth, and no less a fool he who would only attribute it to cold.
          The truth is that mankind has found both warm and cold courage very
          useful, yet not often enough to prevent it from setting them both
          in the category of precious stones.278.The gracious
          Memory.—A man of high rank will do well to develop a
          gracious memory, that is, to note all the good qualities of people
          and remember them particularly; for in this way he holds them in an
          agreeable dependence. A man may also act in this way towards
          himself: whether or not he has a gracious memory determines in the
          end the superiority, gentleness, or distrust with which he observes
          his own inclinations and intentions, and finally even the nature of
          these inclinations and intentions.279.Wherein we
          become Artists.—He who makes an idol of some one
          endeavours to justify himself in his own eyes by idealising this
          person: in other words, he becomes an artist that he may have a
          clear conscience. When he suffers he does not suffer from his
          ignorance, but from the lie he has told himself to make himself
          ignorant. The inmost misery and desire of such a man—and all
          passionate lovers are included in this category—cannot be exhausted
          by normal means.[pg 257]280.Childlike.—Those who live
          like children—those who have not to struggle for their daily bread,
          and do not think that their actions have any ultimate
          signification—remain childlike.281.Our Ego desires
          Everything.—It would seem as if men in general were
          only inspired by the desire to possess: languages at least would
          permit of this supposition, for they view past actions from the
          standpoint that we have been put in possession of
          something—“Ihavespoken, struggled, conquered”—as if to say, I am now in
          possession of my word, my struggle, my victory. How greedy man
          appears in this light! he cannot even let the past escape him: he
          even wishes tohaveit still!282.Danger in
          Beauty.—This woman is beautiful and intelligent:
          alas, how much more intelligent she would have become if she had
          not been beautiful!283.Domestic and
          Mental Peace.—Our habitual mood depends upon the mood
          in which we maintain our habitual entourage.284.New Things as
          Old Ones.—Many people seem irritated when something
          new is told them:[pg
          258]they feel the ascendancy which the news has given to the person who
          has learnt it first.285.What are the
          Limits of the Ego.—The majority of people take under
          their protection, as it were, something that they know, as if the
          fact of knowing it was sufficient in itself to make it their
          property. The acquisitiveness of the egoistic feeling has no
          limits: Great men speak as if they had behind them the whole of
          time, and had placed themselves at the head of this enormous host;
          and good women boast of the beauty of their children, their
          clothes, their dog, their physician, or their native town, but the
          only thing they dare not say is,“I am all
          that.”Chi non ha non
          è—as they say in Italy.286.Domestic
          Animals, Pets and the Like.—Could there be anything
          more repugnant than the sentimentality which is shown to plants and
          animals—and this on the part of a creature who from the very
          beginning has made such ravages among them as their most ferocious
          enemy,—and who ends by even claiming affectionate feelings from his
          weakened and mutilated victims! Before this kind of“nature”man must above all be serious, if he is
          any sort of a thinking being.287.Two
          Friends.—They were friends once, but now they have
          ceased to be so, and both of them[pg 259]broke off the friendship at the same time,
          the one because he believed himself to be too greatly
          misunderstood, and the other because he thought he was known too
          intimately—and both were wrong! For neither of them knew himself
          well enough.288.The Comedy of
          the Noble Souls.—Those who cannot succeed in
          exhibiting a noble and cordial familiarity endeavour to let the
          nobleness of their nature be seen by their exercise of reserve and
          strictness, and a certain contempt for familiarity, as if their
          strong sense of confidence were ashamed to show itself.289.Where we may
          say Nothing against Virtue.—Among cowards it is
          thought bad form to say anything against bravery, for any
          expression of this kind would give rise to some contempt; and
          unfeeling people are irritated when anything is said against
          pity.9290.A
          Waste.—We find that with irritable and abrupt people
          their first words and actions generally afford no indication of
          their actual character—they are prompted by circumstances, and are
          to some[pg
          260]extent simply reproductions of the spirit of these circumstances.
          Because, however, as the words have been uttered and the deeds
          done, the subsequent words and deeds, indicating the real nature of
          such people, have often to be used to reconcile, amend, or
          extinguish the former.291.Arrogance.—Arrogance is an
          artificial and simulated pride; but it is precisely the essential
          nature of pride to be incapable of artifice, simulation, or
          hypocrisy—and thus arrogance is the hypocrisy of the incapacity for
          hypocrisy, a very difficult thing, and one which is a failure in
          most cases. But if we suppose that, as most frequently happens, the
          presumptuous person betrays himself, then a treble annoyance falls
          to his lot: people are angry with him because he has endeavoured to
          deceive them, and because he wished to show himself superior to
          them, and finally they laugh at him because he failed in both these
          endeavours. How earnestly, therefore, should we dissuade our
          fellow-men from arrogance!292.A Species of
          Misconception.—When we hear somebody speak it is
          often sufficient for his pronunciation of a single consonant (the
          letter r, for example) to fill us with doubts as to the honesty of
          his feelings: we are not accustomed to this particular
          pronunciation, and should have to make it ourselves as it were
          arbitrarily—it sounds“forced”[pg 261]to us. This is the
          domain of the greatest possible misconception: and it is the same
          with the style of a writer who has certain habits which are not the
          habits of everybody. His“artlessness”is felt as such only by himself,
          and precisely in regard to that which he himself feels to be“forced”(because he has yielded in
          this matter to the prevailing fashion and to so called“good taste”), he may perhaps give pleasure and
          inspire confidence.