Book V.423.In the Great
          Silence.—Here is the sea, here may we forget the
          town. It is true that its bells are still ringing the Angelus—that
          solemn and foolish yet sweet sound at the junction between day and
          night,—but one moment more! now all is silent. Yonder lies the
          ocean, pale and brilliant; it cannot speak. The sky is glistening
          with its eternal mute evening hues, red, yellow, and green: it
          cannot speak. The small cliffs and rocks which stretch out into the
          sea as if each one of them were endeavouring to find the loneliest
          spot—they too are dumb. Beautiful and awful indeed is this vast
          silence, which so suddenly overcomes us and makes our heart
          swell.Alas! what
          deceit lies in this dumb beauty! How well could it speak, and how
          evilly, too, if it wished! Its tongue, tied up and fastened, and
          its face of suffering happiness—all this is but malice, mocking at
          your sympathy: be it so! I do not feel ashamed to be the plaything
          of such powers! but I pity thee, oh nature, because thou must be
          silent, even though it be only malice that binds thy tongue: nay, I
          pity thee for the sake of thy malice![pg 308]Alas! the
          silence deepens, and once again my heart swells within me: it is
          startled by a fresh truth—it, too, is dumb; it likewise sneers when
          the mouth calls out something to this beauty; it also enjoys the
          sweet malice of its silence. I come to hate speaking; yea, even
          thinking. Behind every word I utter do I not hear the laughter of
          error, imagination, and insanity? Must I not laugh at my pity and
          mock my own mockery? Oh sea, oh evening, ye are bad teachers! Ye
          teach man how to cease to be a man. Is he to give himself up to
          you? Shall he become as you now are, pale, brilliant, dumb,
          immense, reposing calmly upon himself?—exalted above himself?424.For whom the
          Truth Exists.—Up to the present time errors have been
          the power most fruitful in consolations: we now expect the same
          effects from accepted truths, and we have been waiting rather too
          long for them. What if these truths could not give us this
          consolation we are looking for? Would that be an argument against
          them? What have these truths in common with the sick condition of
          suffering and degenerate men that they should be useful to them? It
          is, of course, no proof against the truth of a plant when it is
          clearly established that it does not contribute in any way to the
          recovery of sick people. Formerly, however, people were so
          convinced that man was the ultimate end of nature that they
          believed that knowledge could reveal nothing that was not
          beneficial and useful to[pg
          309]man—nay, there could not, should not be, any other things in
          existence.Perhaps all this
          leads to the conclusion that truth as an entity and a coherent
          whole exists only for those natures who, like Aristotle, are at
          once powerful and harmless, joyous and peaceful: just as none but
          these would be in a position to seek such truths; for the others
          seek remedies for themselves—however proud they may be of their
          intellect and its freedom, they do not seek truth. Hence it comes
          about that these others take no real joy in science, but reproach
          it for its coldness, dryness, and inhumanity. This is the judgment
          of sick people about the games of the healthy.—Even the Greek gods
          were unable to administer consolation; and when at length the
          entire Greek world fell ill, this was a reason for the destruction
          of such gods.425.We Gods in
          Exile.—Owing to errors regarding their descent, their
          uniqueness, their mission, and by claims based upon these errors,
          men have again and again“surpassed
          themselves”; but through these same errors the world has
          been filled with unspeakable suffering, mutual persecution,
          suspicion, misunderstanding, and an even greater amount of
          individual misery. Men have become suffering creatures in
          consequence of their morals, and the sum-total of what they have
          obtained by those morals is simply the feeling that they are far
          too good and great for this world, and that they are enjoying
          merely a transitory existence on it. As[pg 310]yet the“proud
          sufferer”is the highest type of mankind.426.The
          Colour-Blindness of Thinkers.—How differently from us
          the Greeks must have viewed nature, since, as we cannot help
          admitting, they were quite colour-blind in regard to blue and
          green, believing the former to be a deeper brown, and the latter to
          be yellow. Thus, for instance, they used the same word to describe
          the colour of dark hair, of the corn-flower, and the southern sea;
          and again they employed exactly the same expression for the colour
          of the greenest herbs, the human skin, honey, and yellow raisins:
          whence it follows that their greatest painters reproduced the world
          they lived in only in black, white, red, and yellow. How different
          and how much nearer to mankind, therefore, must nature have seemed
          to them, since in their eyes the tints of mankind predominated also
          in nature, and nature was, as it were, floating in the coloured
          ether of humanity! (blue and green more than anything else
          dehumanise nature). It is this defect which developed the playful
          facility that characterised the Greeks of seeing the phenomena of
          nature as gods and demi-gods—that is to say, as human forms.Let this,
          however, merely serve as a simile for another supposition. Every
          thinker paints his world and the things that surround him in fewer
          colours than really exist, and he is blind to individual colours.
          This is something more than a mere deficiency. Thanks to this
          nearer approach and[pg
          311]simplification, he imagines he sees in things those harmonies of
          colours which possess a great charm, and may greatly enrich nature.
          Perhaps, indeed, it was in this way that men first learnt to take
          delight in viewing existence, owing to its being first of all
          presented to them in one or two shades, and consequently
          harmonised. They practised these few shades, so to speak, before
          they could pass on to any more. And even now certain individuals
          endeavour to get rid of a partial colour-blindness that they may
          obtain a richer faculty of sight and discernment, in the course of
          which they find that they not only discover new pleasures, but are
          also obliged to lose and give up some of their former ones.427.The
          Embellishment of Science.—In the same way that the
          feeling that“nature is ugly, wild,
          tedious—we must embellish it (embellir la
          nature)”—brought about rococo horticulture, so
          does the view that“science is ugly,
          difficult, dry, dreary and weary, we must embellish it,”invariably gives rise to something called philosophy. This
          philosophy sets out to do what all art and poetry endeavour to do,
          viz., giving amusement above all else; but it wishes to do this, in
          conformity with its hereditary pride, in a higher and more sublime
          fashion before an audience of superior intellects. It is no small
          ambition to create for these intellects a kind of horticulture, the
          principal charm of which—like that of the usual gardening—is to
          bring about an optical illusion (by means of temples, perspective,[pg 312]grottos, winding
          walks, and waterfalls, to speak in similes), exhibiting science in
          a condensed form and in all kinds of strange and unexpected
          illuminations, infusing into it as much indecision, irrationality,
          and dreaminess as will enable us to walk about in it“as in savage nature,”but without trouble and
          boredom.Those who are
          possessed of this ambition even dream of making religion
          superfluous—religion, which among men of former times served as the
          highest kind of entertainment. All this is now running its course,
          and will one day attain its highest tide. Even now hostile voices
          are being raised against philosophy, exclaiming:“Return to science, to nature, and the naturalness of
          science!”and thus an age may begin which may discover the
          most powerful beauty precisely in the“savage and ugly”domains of science, just as it
          is only since the time of Rousseau that we have discovered the
          sense for the beauty of high mountains and deserts.428.Two Kinds of
          Moralists.—To see a law of nature for the first time,
          and to see it whole (for example, the law of gravity or the
          reflection of light and sound), and afterwards to explain such a
          law, are two different things and concern different classes of
          minds. In the same way, those moralists who observe and exhibit
          human laws and habits—moralists with discriminating ears, noses,
          and eyes—differ entirely from those who interpret their
          observations. These latter must above all be inventive, and[pg 313]must possess an
          imagination untrammelled by sagacity and knowledge.429.The new
          Passion.—Why do we fear and dread a possible return
          to barbarism? Is it because it would make people less happy than
          they are now? Certainly not! the barbarians of all ages possessed
          more happiness than we do: let us not deceive ourselves on this
          point!—but our impulse towards knowledge is too widely developed to
          allow us to value happiness without knowledge, or the happiness of
          a strong and fixed delusion: it is painful to us even to imagine
          such a state of things! Our restless pursuit of discoveries and
          divinations has become for us as attractive and indispensable as
          hapless love to the lover, which on no account would he exchange
          for indifference,—nay, perhaps we, too, are hapless lovers!
          Knowledge within us has developed into a passion, which does not
          shrink from any sacrifice, and at bottom fears nothing but its own
          extinction. We sincerely believe that all humanity, weighed down as
          it is by the burden of this passion, are bound to feel more exalted
          and comforted than formerly, when they had not yet overcome the
          longing for the coarser satisfaction which accompanies
          barbarism.It may be that
          mankind may perish eventually from this passion for knowledge!—but
          even that does not daunt us. Did Christianity ever shrink from a
          similar thought? Are not love and death brother and sister? Yes, we
          detest barbarism,—we[pg
          314]all prefer that humanity should perish rather than that knowledge
          should enter into a stage of retrogression. And, finally, if
          mankind does not perish through some passion it will perish through
          some weakness: which would we prefer? This is the main question. Do
          we wish its end to be in fire and light, or in the sands?430.Likewise
          Heroic.—To do things of the worst possible odour,
          things of which we scarcely dare to speak, but which are
          nevertheless useful and necessary, is also heroic. The Greeks were
          not ashamed of numbering even the cleansing of a stable among the
          great tasks of Hercules.431.The Opinions of
          Opponents.—In order to measure the natural subtlety
          or weakness of even the cleverest heads, we must consider the
          manner in which they take up and reproduce the opinions of their
          adversaries, for the natural measure of any intellect is thereby
          revealed. The perfect sage involuntarily idealises his opponent and
          frees his inconsistencies from all defects and accidentalities: he
          only takes up arms against him when he has thus turned his opponent
          into a god with shining weapons.432.Investigator
          and Attempter.—There is no exclusive method of
          knowing in science. We must[pg 315]deal with things tentatively, treating them
          by turns harshly or justly, passionately or coldly. One
          investigator deals with things like a policeman, another like a
          confessor, and yet a third like an inquisitive traveller. We force
          something from them now by sympathy and now by violence: the one is
          urged onward and led to see clearly by the veneration which the
          secrets of the things inspire in him, and the other again by the
          indiscretion and malice met with in the explanation of these
          secrets. We investigators, like all conquerors, explorers,
          navigators, and adventurers, are men of a daring morality, and we
          must put up with our liability to be in the main looked upon as
          evil.433.Seeing with new
          Eyes.—Presuming that by the term“beauty in art”is always implied the imitation
          of something that is happy—and this I consider to be true—according
          as an age or a people or a great autocratic individuality
          represents happiness: what then is disclosed by the so-called
          realism of our modern artists in regard to the happiness of our
          epoch? It is undoubtedly its type of beauty which we now understand
          most easily and enjoy best of any. As a consequence, we are induced
          to believe that this happiness which is now peculiar to us is based
          on realism, on the sharpest possible senses, and on the true
          conception of the actual—that is to say, not upon reality, but upon
          what we know of reality. The results of science have already gained
          so much in depth and extent that the artists of our century have
          involuntarily[pg
          316]become the glorifiers of scientific“blessings”per
          se.434.Intercession.—Unpretentious
          regions are subjects for great landscape painters; remarkable and
          rare regions for inferior painters: for the great things of nature
          and humanity must intercede in favour of their little, mediocre,
          and vain admirers—whereas the great man intercedes in favour of
          unassuming things.435.Not to perish
          unnoticed.—It is not only once but continuously that
          our excellence and greatness are constantly crumbling away; the
          weeds that grow among everything and cling to everything ruin all
          that is great in us—the wretchedness of our surroundings, which we
          always try to overlook and which is before our eyes at every hour
          of the day, the innumerable little roots of mean and petty feelings
          which we allow to grow up all about us, in our office, among our
          companions, or our daily labours. If we permit these small weeds to
          escape our notice we shall perish through them unnoticed!—And, if
          you must perish, then do so immediately and suddenly; for in that
          case you will perhaps leave proud ruins behind you! and not, as is
          now to be feared, merely molehills, covered with grass and
          weeds—these petty and miserable conquerors, as humble as ever, and
          too wretched even to triumph.[pg 317]436.Casuistic.—We are
          confronted with a very bitter and painful dilemma, for the solution
          of which not every one's bravery and character are equal: when, as
          passengers on board a steamer, we discover that the captain and the
          helmsman are making dangerous mistakes, and that we are their
          superiors in nautical science—and then we ask ourselves:“What would happen if we organised a mutiny
          against them, and made them both prisoners? Is it not our duty to
          do so in view of our superiority? and would not they in their turn
          be justified in putting us in irons for encouraging
          disobedience?”This is a simile
          for higher and worse situations; and the final question to be
          decided is, What guarantees our superiority and our faith in
          ourselves in such a case? Success? but in order to do that we must
          do the very thing in which all the danger lies—not only dangerous
          for ourselves, but also for the ship.437.Privileges.—The man who
          really owns himself, that is to say, he who has finally conquered
          himself, regards it as his own right to punish, to pardon, or to
          pity himself: he need not concede this privilege to any one, though
          he may freely bestow it upon some one else—a friend, for
          example—but he knows that in doing this he is conferring a right,
          and that rights can only be conferred by one who is in full
          possession of power.[pg 318]438.Man and
          Things.—Why does the man not see the things? He
          himself is in the way: he conceals the things.439.Characteristics
          of Happiness.—There are two things common to all
          sensations of happiness: a profusion of feelings, accompanied by
          animal spirits, so that, like the fishes, we feel ourselves to be
          in our element and play about in it. Good Christians will
          understand what Christian exuberance means.440.Never
          Renounce.—Renouncing the world without knowing it,
          like a nun, results in a fruitless and perhaps melancholy solitude.
          This has nothing in common with the solitude of thevita contemplativaof the
          thinker: when he chooses this form of solitude he wishes to
          renounce nothing; but he would on the contrary regard it as a
          renunciation, a melancholy destruction of his own self, if he were
          obliged to continue in thevita
          practica. He forgoes this latter because he knows it,
          because he knows himself. So he jumps intohiswater, and thus gainshischeerfulness.441.Why the nearest
          Things become ever more distant for Us.—The more we
          give up[pg
          319]our minds to all that has been and will be, the paler will become
          that which actually is. When we live with the dead and participate
          in their death, what are our“neighbours”to us? We grow lonelier simply
          because the entire flood of humanity is surging round about us. The
          fire that burns within us, and glows for all that is human, is
          continually increasing—and hence we look upon everything that
          surrounds us as if it had become more indifferent, more
          shadowy,—but our cold glance is offensive.442.The
          Rule.—“The rule always
          appears to me to be more interesting than the
          exception”—whoever thinks thus has made considerable
          progress in knowledge, and is one of the initiated.443.On
          Education.—I have gradually come to see daylight in
          regard to the most general defect in our methods of education and
          training: nobody learns, nobody teaches, nobody wishes, to endure
          solitude.444.Surprise at
          Resistance.—Because we have reached the point of
          being able to see through a thing we believe that henceforth it can
          offer us no further resistance—and then we are surprised to find
          that we can see through it and yet cannot penetrate[pg 320]through it. This is the same kind of
          foolishness and surprise as that of the fly on a pane of glass.445.Where the
          Noblest are Mistaken.—We give some one at length our
          dearest and most valued possession, and then love has nothing more
          to give: but the recipient of the gift will certainly not consider
          it as his dearest possession, and will consequently be wanting in
          that full and complete gratitude which we expect from him.446.Hierarchy.—First and
          foremost, there are the superficial thinkers, and secondly the
          profound thinkers—such as dive into the depths of a thing,—thirdly,
          the thorough thinkers, who get to the bottom of a thing—which is of
          much greater importance than merely diving into its depths,—and,
          finally, those who leap head foremost into the marsh: though this
          must not be looked upon as indicating either depth or thoroughness!
          these are the lovers of obscurity.13447.Master and
          Pupil.—By cautioning his pupils against himself the
          teacher shows his humanity.[pg 321]448.Honouring
          Reality.—How can we look at this exulting multitude
          without tears and acquiescence? at one time we thought little of
          the object of their exultation, and we should still think so if we
          ourselves had not come through a similar experience. And what may
          these experiences lead us to! what are our opinions! In order that
          we may not lose ourselves and our reason we must fly from
          experiences. It was thus that Plato fled from actuality, and wished
          to contemplate things only in their pale mental concepts: he was
          full of sensitiveness, and knew how easily the waves of this
          sensitiveness would drown his reason.—Must the sage therefore say,“I will honour reality, but I will at the
          same time turn my back to it because I know and dread it?”Ought he to behave as certain African tribes do in the presence of
          their sovereign, whom they approach backwards, thus showing their
          reverence at the same time as their dread?449.Where are the
          poor in Spirit?—Oh, how greatly it goes against my
          grain to impose my own thoughts upon others! How I rejoice over
          every mood and secret change within me as the result of which the
          thoughts of others are victorious over my own! but from time to
          time I enjoy an even greater satisfaction, when I am allowed to
          give away my intellectual possessions, like the confessor sitting
          in his box and anxiously awaiting[pg 322]the arrival of some distressed person who
          stands in need of consolation, and will be only too glad to relate
          the full misery of his thoughts so that the listener's hand and
          heart will once again be filled, and the troubled soul eased! Not
          only has the confessor no desire for renown: he would fain shun
          gratitude as well, for it is obtrusive, and does not stand in awe
          of solitude or silence.But to live
          without a name, and even to be slightly sneered at; too obscure to
          arouse envy or enmity; with a head free from fever, a handful of
          knowledge, and a pocketful of experience; a physician, as it were,
          of the poor in spirit, helping this one or that one whose head is
          troubled with opinions, without the latter perceiving who has
          actually helped him! without any desire to appear to be in the
          right in the presence of his patient, or to carry off a victory. To
          speak to him in such a way that, after a short and almost
          imperceptible hint or objection, the listener may find out for
          himself what is right and proudly walk away! To be like an obscure
          and unknown inn which turns no one away who is in need, but which
          is afterwards forgotten and laughed at! To be without any
          advantages over others—neither possessing better food nor purer
          air, nor a more cheerful mind—but always to be giving away,
          returning, communicating, and becoming poorer! To know how to be
          humble in order to be accessible to many people and humiliating to
          none! To take a great deal of injustice on his shoulders and creep
          through the cracks and crannies of all kinds of errors, in order
          that we may reach many obscure souls on their secret paths![pg 323]ever in possession
          of some kind of love, and some kind of egoism and self-enjoyment!
          in possession of power, and yet at the same time hidden and
          resigned! constantly basking in the sunshine and sweetness of
          grace, and yet knowing that quite near to us stands the ladder
          leading to the sublime!—that would be life! that would indeed be a
          reason for a long life!450.The Temptations
          of Knowledge.—A glance through the gate of science
          acts upon passionate spirits as the charm of charms: they will
          probably become dreamers, or in the most favourable cases poets, so
          great is their desire for the happiness of the man who can discern.
          Does it not enter into all your senses, this note of sweet
          temptation by which science has announced its joyful message in a
          thousand ways, and in the thousand and first way, the noblest of
          all,“Begone, illusion! for then‘Woe is me’also vanished, and with
          it woe itself is gone”(Marcus Aurelius).451.For whom a
          Court Jester is needful.—Those who are very
          beautiful, very good, and very powerful scarcely ever learn the
          full and naked truth about anything,—for in their presence we
          involuntarily lie a little, because we feel their influence, and in
          view of this influence convey a truth in the form of an adaptation
          (by falsifying the shades and[pg 324]degrees of facts, by omitting or adding
          details, and withholding that which is insusceptible of
          adaptation). If, however, in spite of all this, people of this
          description insist upon hearing the truth, they must keep a court
          jester—a being with the madman's privilege of being unable to adapt
          himself.452.Impatience.—There is a
          certain degree of impatience in men of thought and action, which in
          cases of failure at once drives them to the opposite camp, induces
          them to take a great interest in it, and to give themselves up to
          new undertakings—until here again the slowness of their success
          drives them away. Thus they rove about, like so many reckless
          adventurers, through the practices of many kingdoms and natures;
          and in the end, as the result of their wide knowledge of men and
          things, acquired by their unheard of travel and practice, and with
          a certain moderation of their craving, they become powerful
          practical men. Hence a defect in character may become the school of
          genius.453.A Moral
          Interregnum.—Who is now in a position to describe
          that which will one day supplant moral feelings and
          judgments!—however certain we may be that these are founded on
          error, and that the building erected upon such foundations cannot
          be repaired: their obligation must gradually diminish from day to
          day, in so far as the obligation of reason[pg 325]does not diminish! To carry out the task of
          re-establishing the laws of life and action is still beyond the
          power of our sciences of physiology and medicine, society and
          solitude: though it is only from them that we can borrow the
          foundation-stones of new ideals (but not the ideals themselves).
          Thus we live a preliminary or after existence, according to our
          tastes and talents, and the best we can do in this interregnum is
          to be as much as possible our own“reges,”and to establish
          small experimental states. We are experiments: if we want to be
          so!454.A
          Digression.—A book like this is not intended to be
          read through at once, or to be read aloud. It is intended more
          particularly for reference, especially on our walks and travels: we
          must take it up and put it down again after a short reading, and,
          more especially, we ought not to be amongst our usual
          surroundings.455.The Primary
          Nature.—As we are now brought up, we begin by
          acquiring a secondary nature, and we possess it when the world
          calls us mature, of age, efficient. A few have sufficient of the
          serpent about them to cast this skin some day, when their primary
          nature has come to maturity under it. But in the majority of people
          the germ of it withers away.[pg 326]456.A Virtue in
          Process of Becoming.—Such assertions and promises as
          those of the ancient philosophers on the unity of virtue and
          felicity, or that of Christianity,“Seek ye
          first the Kingdom of God and His righteousness, and all these
          things shall be added unto you,”have never been made with
          absolute sincerity, but always without a bad conscience
          nevertheless. People were in the habit of boldly laying down
          principles—which they wished to be true—exactly as if they were
          truth itself, in spite of all appearances to the contrary, and in
          doing this they felt neither religious nor moral compunction; for
          it wasin honorem
          maioremof virtue or of God that one had gone beyond
          truth, without, however, any selfish intention!Many good people
          still act up to this degree of truthfulness: when they feel
          unselfish they think it permissible to treat truth more lightly.
          Let it be remembered that the word honesty is neither to be found
          among the Socratic nor the Christian virtues: it is one of our most
          recent virtues, not yet quite mature, frequently misconstrued and
          misunderstood, scarcely conscious of itself—something in embryo,
          which we may either promote or check according to our
          inclination.457.Final
          Taciturnity.—There are some men who fare like the
          digger after hidden treasures: they quite accidentally discover the
          carefully-preserved[pg
          327]secrets of another's soul, and as a result come into the possession
          of knowledge which it is often a heavy burden to bear. In certain
          circumstances we may know the living and the dead, and sound their
          inmost thoughts to such an extent that it becomes painful to us to
          speak to others about them: at every word we utter we are afraid of
          being indiscreet.—I can easily imagine a sudden silence on the part
          of the wisest historian.458.The Great
          Prize.—There is a very rare thing, but a very
          delightful one, viz. the man with a nobly-formed intellect who
          possesses at the same time the character and inclinations, and even
          meets with the experiences, suited to such an intellect.459.The Magnanimity
          of the Thinker.—Both Rousseau and Schopenhauer were
          proud enough to inscribe upon their lives the motto,Vitam impendere vero. And how
          they both must have suffered in their pride because they could not
          succeed inverum impendere
          vitæ!—verum,
          such as each of them understood it,—when their lives ran side by
          side with their knowledge like an uncouth bass which is not in tune
          with the melody.Knowledge,
          however, would be in a bad way if it were measured out to every
          thinker only in proportion as it can be adapted to his own person.
          And thinkers would be in a bad way if their vanity[pg 328]were so great that they could only
          endure such an adaptation, for the noblest virtue of a great
          thinker is his magnanimity, which urges him on in his search for
          knowledge to sacrifice himself and his life unshrinkingly, often
          shamefacedly, and often with sublime scorn, and smiling.