460.Utilising our
          Hours of Danger.—Those men and conditions whose every
          movement may mean danger to our possessions, honour, and life or
          death, and to those most dear to us, we shall naturally learn to
          know thoroughly. Tiberius, for instance, must have meditated much
          more deeply on the character and methods of government of the
          Emperor Augustus, and must have known far more about them than even
          the wisest historian.At the present
          day we all live, relatively speaking, in a security which is much
          too great to make us true psychologists: some survey their
          fellow-men as a hobby, others out of ennui, and others again merely
          from habit; but never to the extent they would do if they were told“Discern or perish!”As long as
          truths do not cut us to the quick we assume an attitude of contempt
          towards them: they still appear to us too much like the“winged dreams,”as if we could or
          could not have them at our discretion, as if we could likewise be
          aroused from these truths as from a dream!461.Hic Rhodus, Hic
          Salta.—Our music, which can and must change
          into everything, because[pg
          329]like the demon of the sea, it has no character of its own: this
          music in former times devoted its attention to the Christian
          savant, and transposed his ideals into sounds: why cannot it
          likewise find those brighter, more cheerful, and universal sounds
          which correspond to the ideal thinker?—a music which could rock
          itself at ease in the vast floating vaults of the soul? So far our
          music has been so great and so good; nothing seemed impossible to
          its powers. May it therefore prove possible to create these three
          sensations at one time: sublimity, deep and warm light, and rapture
          of the greatest possible consistency!462.Slow
          Cures.—Chronic illnesses of the soul, like those of
          the body, are very rarely due to one gross offence against physical
          and mental reason, but as a general rule they arise from
          innumerable and petty negligences of a minor order.—A man, for
          example, whose breathing becomes a trifle weaker every day, and
          whose lungs, by inhaling too little air, are deprived of their
          proper amount of exercise, will end by being struck down by some
          chronic disease of the lungs. The only remedy for cases like these
          is a countless number of minor exercises of a contrary
          tendency—making it a rule, for example, to take a long and deep
          breath every quarter of an hour, lying flat on the ground if
          possible. For this purpose a clock which strikes the quarters
          should be chosen as a lifelong companion.All these
          remedies are slow and trifling; but[pg 330]yet the man who wishes to cure his soul will
          carefully consider a change, even in his least important habits.
          Many a man will utter a cold and angry word to his surroundings ten
          times a day without thinking about it, and he will forget that
          after a few years it will have become a regular habit with him to
          put his surroundings out of temper ten times a day. But he can also
          acquire the habit of doing good to them ten times.463.On the Seventh
          Day.—“You praise this as my
          creation? but I have only put aside what was a burden to me! my
          soul is above the vanity of creators.—You praise this as my
          resignation? but I have only stripped myself of what had become
          burdensome! My soul is above the vanity of the resigned
          ones!”464.The Donor's
          Modesty.—There is such a want of generosity in always
          posing as the donor and benefactor, and showing one's face when
          doing so! But to give and bestow, and at the same time to conceal
          one's name and favour! or not to have a name at all, like nature,
          in whom this fact is more refreshing to us than anything else—here
          at last we no more meet with the giver and bestower, no more with a“gracious countenance.”—It is true
          that you have now forfeited even this comfort, for you have placed
          a God in this nature—and now everything is once again fettered and
          oppressed! Well? are we never to have the right of[pg 331]remaining alone with ourselves? are we
          always to be watched, guarded, surrounded by leading strings and
          gifts? If there is always some one round about us, the best part of
          courage and kindness will ever remain impossible of attainment in
          this world. Are we not tempted to fly to hell before this continual
          obtrusiveness of heaven, this inevitable supernatural neighbour?
          Never mind, it was only a dream; let us wake up!465.At a
          Meeting.—A.What
          are you looking at? you have been standing here for a very long
          time.B.Always the new and the old over again! the helplessness of a thing
          urges me on to plunge into it so deeply that I end by penetrating
          to its deepest depths, and perceive that in reality it is not worth
          so very much. At the end of all experiences of this kind we meet
          with a kind of sorrow and stupor. I experience this on a small
          scale several times a day.466.A Loss of
          Renown.—What an advantage it is to be able to speak
          as a stranger to mankind! When they take away our anonymity, and
          make us famous, the gods deprive us of“half our virtue.”467.Doubly
          Patient.—“By doing this you
          will hurt many people.”—I know that, and I also know[pg 332]that I shall have to
          suffer for it doubly: in the first place out of pity for their
          suffering, and secondly from the revenge they will take on me. But
          in spite of this I cannot help doing what I do.468.The Kingdom of
          Beauty is Greater.—We move about in nature, cunning
          and cheerful, in order that we may surprise everything in the
          beauty peculiar to it; we make an effort, whether in sunshine or
          under a stormy sky, to see a distant part of the coast with its
          rocks, bays, and olive and pine trees under an aspect in which it
          achieves its perfection and consummation. Thus also we should walk
          about among men as their discoverers and explorers, meting out to
          them good and evil in order that we may unveil the peculiar beauty
          which is seen with some in the sunshine, in others under
          thunder-clouds, or with others again only in twilight and under a
          rainy sky.Are we then
          forbidden to enjoy the evil man like some savage landscape which
          possesses its own bold and daring lines and luminous effects, while
          this same man, so long as he behaves well, and in conformity with
          the law, appears to us to be an error of drawing, and a mere
          caricature which offends us like a defect in nature?—Yes, this is
          forbidden: for as yet we have only been permitted to seek beauty in
          anything that is morally good,—and this is sufficient to explain
          why we have found so little and have been compelled to look for
          beauty without either flesh or bones!—in the same way as[pg 333]evil men are
          familiar with innumerable kinds of happiness which the virtuous
          never dream of, we may also find among them innumerable types of
          beauty, many of them as yet undiscovered.469.The Inhumanity
          of the Sage.—The heavy and grinding progress of the
          sage, who in the words of the Buddhist song,“Wanders lonely like the rhinoceros,”now and
          again stands in need of proofs of a conciliatory and softened
          humanity, and not only proofs of those accelerated steps, those
          polite and sociable witticisms; not only of humour and a certain
          self-mockery, but likewise of contradictions and occasional returns
          to the predominating inconsistencies. In order that he may not
          resemble the heavy roller that rolls along like fate, the sage who
          wishes to teach must take advantage of his defects, and utilise
          them for his own adornment; and when saying“despise me”he will implore permission to be
          the advocate of a presumptuous truth.This sage wishes
          to lead you to the mountains, and he will perhaps endanger your
          life: therefore as the price of his enjoyment he willingly
          authorises you to take your revenge either before or afterwards on
          such a guide. Do you remember what thoughts came into your head
          when he once led you to a gloomy cavern over a slippery path? Your
          distrustful heart beat rapidly, and said inwardly,“This guide might surely do something better than crawl
          about here! he is one of those idle[pg 334]people who are full of curiosity—is it not
          doing him too much honour to appear to attach any value at all to
          him by following him?”470.Many at the
          Banquet.—How happy we are when we are fed like the
          birds by the hand of some one who throws them their crumbs without
          examining them too closely, or inquiring into their worthiness! To
          live like a bird which comes and flies away, and does not carry its
          name on its beak! I take great pleasure in satisfying my appetite
          at the banquet of the many.471.Another type of
          Love for one's Neighbour.—Everything that is
          agitated, noisy, fitful, and nervous forms a contrast to the great
          passion which, glowing in the heart of man like a quiet and gloomy
          flame, and gathering about it all that is flaming and ardent, gives
          to man the appearance of coldness and indifference, and stamps a
          certain impassiveness on his features. Such men are occasionally
          capable of showing their love for their neighbour, but this love is
          different from that of sociable people who are anxious to please.
          It is a mild, contemplative, and calm amiability: these people, as
          it were, look out of the windows of the castle which serves them as
          a stronghold, and consequently as a prison; for the outlook into
          the far distance, the open air, and a different world is so
          pleasant for them![pg 335]472.Not Justifying
          Oneself.—A.But
          why are you not willing to justify yourself?B.I
          could do it in this instance, as in dozens of others; but I despise
          the pleasure which lies in justification, for all that matters
          little to me, and I would rather bear a stained reputation than
          give those petty folks the spiteful pleasure of saying,“He takes these things very
          seriously.”This is not true. Perhaps I ought to have more
          consideration for myself, and look upon it as a duty to rectify
          erroneous opinions about myself—I am too indifferent and too
          indolent regarding myself, and consequently also regarding
          everything that is brought about through my agency.473.Where to Build
          one's House.—If you feel great and productive in
          solitude, society will belittle and isolate you, andvice
          versa. A powerful mildness such as that of a
          father:—wherever this feeling takes possession of you,therebuild your house, whether in the midst of the multitude, or on some
          silent spot.Ubi pater sum, ibi
          patria.14474.The only
          Means.—“Dialectic is the only
          means of reaching the divine essence, and penetrating[pg 336]behind the veil of appearance.”This declaration of Plato in regard to dialectic is as solemn and
          passionate as that of Schopenhauer in regard to the contrary of
          dialectic—and both are wrong. For that to which they wish to point
          out the way to us does not exist.—And so far have not all the great
          passions of mankind been passions for something non-existent?—and
          all their ceremonies—ceremonies for something non-existent
          also?475.Becoming
          Heavy.—You know him not; whatever weights he may
          attach to himself he will nevertheless be able to raise them all
          with him. But you, judging from the weak flapping of your own
          wings, come to the conclusion that he wishes to remain below,
          merely because he does burden himself with those weights.476.At the Harvest
          Thanksgiving of the Intellect.—There is a daily
          increase and accumulation of experiences, events, opinions upon
          these experiences and events, and dreams upon these opinions—a
          boundless and delightful display of wealth! its aspect dazzles the
          eyes: I can no longer understand how the poor in spirit can be
          called blessed! Occasionally, however, I envy them when I am tired:
          for the superintendence of such vast wealth is no easy task, and
          its weight frequently crushes all happiness.—Alas, if only the[pg 337]mere sight of it
          were sufficient! If only we could be misers of our knowledge!477.Freed from
          Scepticism.—A.Some
          men emerge from a general moral scepticism bad-tempered and feeble,
          corroded, worm-eaten, and even partly consumed—but I on the other
          hand, more courageous and healthier than ever, and with my
          instincts conquered once more. Where a strong wind blows, where the
          waves are rolling angrily, and where more than usual danger is to
          be faced, there I feel happy. I did not become a worm, although I
          often had to work and dig like a worm.B.You
          have just ceased to be a sceptic; for you deny!A.And
          in doing so I have learnt to say yea again.478.Let us pass
          by.—Spare him! Leave him in his solitude! Do you wish
          to crush him down entirely? He became cracked like a glass into
          which some hot liquid was poured suddenly—and he was such a
          precious glass!479.Love and
          Truthfulness.—Through our love we have become dire
          offenders against truth, and even habitual dissimulators and
          thieves, who give[pg
          338]out more things as true than seem to us to be true. On this account
          the thinker must from time to time drive away those whom he loves
          (not necessarily those who love him), so that they may show their
          sting and wickedness, and cease to tempt him. Consequently the
          kindness of the thinker will have its waning and waxing moon.480.Inevitable.—No matter what
          your experience may be, any one who does not feel well disposed
          towards you will find in this experience some pretext for
          disparaging you! You may undergo the greatest possible revolutions
          of mind and knowledge, and at length, with the melancholy smile of
          the convalescent, you may be able to step out into freedom and
          bright stillness, and yet some one will say:“This fellow looks upon his illness as an argument, and
          takes his impotence to be a proof of the impotence of all others—he
          is vain enough to fall ill that he may feel the superiority of the
          sufferer.”And again, if somebody were to break the chains
          that bound him down, and wounded himself severely in doing so, some
          one else would point at him mockingly and cry:“How awkward he is! there is a man who had got
          accustomed to his chains, and yet he is fool enough to burst them
          asunder!”481.Two
          Germans.—If we compare Kant and Schopenhauer with
          Plato, Spinoza, Pascal, Rousseau, and Goethe, with reference to
          their souls[pg
          339]and not their intellects, we shall see that the two first-named
          thinkers are at a disadvantage: their thoughts do not constitute a
          passionate history of their souls—we are not led to expect in them
          romance, crises, catastrophies, or death struggles. Their thinking
          is not at the same time the involuntary biography of a soul, but in
          the case of Kant merely of a head; and in the case of Schopenhauer
          again merely the description and reflection of a character
          (“the invariable”) and the pleasure
          which this reflection causes, that is to say, the pleasure of
          meeting with an intellect of the first order.Kant, when he
          shimmers through his thoughts, appears to us as an honest and
          honourable man in the best sense of the words, but likewise as an
          insignificant one: he is wanting in breadth and power; he had not
          come through many experiences, and his method of working did not
          allow him sufficient time to undergo experiences. Of course, in
          speaking of experiences, I do not refer to the ordinary external
          events of life, but to those fatalities and convulsions which occur
          in the course of the most solitary and quiet life which has some
          leisure and glows with the passion for thinking. Schopenhauer has
          at all events one advantage over him; for he at least was
          distinguished by a certain fierce ugliness of disposition, which
          showed itself in hatred, desire, vanity, and suspicion: he was of a
          rather more ferocious disposition, and had both time and leisure to
          indulge this ferocity. But he lacked“development,”which was also wanting in his
          range of thought: he had no“history.”[pg 340]482.Seeking one's
          Company.—Are we then looking for too much when we
          seek the company of men who have grown mild, agreeable to the
          taste, and nutritive, like chestnuts which have been put into the
          fire and taken out just at the right moment? Of men who expect
          little from life, and prefer to accept this little as a present
          rather than as a merit of their own, as if it were carried to them
          by birds and bees? Of men who are too proud ever to feel themselves
          rewarded, and too serious in their passion for knowledge and
          honesty to have time for or pleasure in fame? Such men we should
          call philosophers; but they themselves will always find some more
          modest designation.483.Satiated with
          Mankind.—A.Seek
          for knowledge! Yes! but always as a man! What? must I always be a
          spectator of the same comedy, and always play a part in the same
          comedy, without ever being able to observe things with other eyes
          than those? and yet there may be countless types of beings whose
          organs are better adapted for knowledge than ours! At the end of
          all their searching for knowledge what will men at length come to
          know? Their organs! which perhaps is as much as to say: the
          impossibility of knowledge! misery and disgust!B.This
          is a bad attack you have—reason is attacking you! to-morrow,
          however, you will again[pg
          341]be in the midst of knowledge, and hence of irrationality—that is to
          say, delighted about all that is human. Let us go to the sea!484.Going our own
          Way.—When we take the decisive step, and make up our
          minds to follow our own path, a secret is suddenly revealed to us:
          it is clear that all those who had hitherto been friendly to us and
          on intimate terms with us judged themselves to be superior to us,
          and are offended now. The best among them are indulgent, and are
          content to wait patiently until we once more find the“right path”—they know it, apparently. Others
          make fun of us, and pretend that we have been seized with a
          temporary attack of mild insanity, or spitefully point out some
          seducer. The more malicious say we are vain fools, and do their
          best to blacken our motives; while the worst of all see in us their
          greatest enemy, some one who is thirsting for revenge after many
          years of dependence,—and are afraid of us. What, then, are we to
          do? My own opinion is that we should begin our sovereignty by
          promising to all our acquaintances in advance a whole year's
          amnesty for sins of every kind.485.Far-off
          Perspectives.—A.But
          why this solitude?B.I am
          not angry with anybody. But when I am alone it seems to me that I
          can see my friends in a clearer and rosier light than when I[pg 342]am with them; and
          when I loved and felt music best I lived far from it. It would seem
          that I must have distant perspectives in order that I may think
          well of things.486.Gold and
          Hunger.—Here and there we meet with a man who changes
          into gold everything that he touches. But some fine evil day he
          will discover that he himself must starve through this gift of his.
          Everything around him is brilliant, superb, and unapproachable in
          its ideal beauty, and now he eagerly longs for things which it is
          impossible for him to turn into gold—and how intense is this
          longing! like that of a starving man for a meal! Query: What will
          he seize?487.Shame.—Look at that noble
          steed pawing the ground, snorting, longing for a ride, and loving
          its accustomed rider—but, shameful to relate, the rider cannot
          mount to-day, he is tired.—Such is the shame felt by the weary
          thinker in the presence of his own philosophy!488.Against the
          Waste of Love.—Do we not blush when we surprise
          ourselves in a state of violent aversion? Well, then, we should
          also blush when we find ourselves possessed of strong affections on
          account of the injustice contained in them. More:[pg 343]there are people who feel their hearts
          weighed down and oppressed when some one gives them the benefit of
          his love and sympathy to the extent that he deprives others of a
          share. The tone of his voice reveals to us the fact that we have
          been specially selected and preferred! but, alas! I am not thankful
          for being thus selected: I experience within myself a certain
          feeling of resentment against him who wishes to distinguish me in
          this way—he shall not love me at the expense of others! I shall
          always try to look after myself and to endure myself, and my heart
          is often filled to overflowing, and with some reason. To such a man
          nothing ought to be given of which others stand so greatly in
          need.489.Friends in
          Need.—We may occasionally remark that one of our
          friends sympathises with another more than with us. His delicacy is
          troubled thereby, and his selfishness is not equal to the task of
          breaking down his feelings of affection: in such a case we should
          facilitate the separation for him, and estrange him in some way in
          order to widen the distance between us.—This is also necessary when
          we fall into a habit of thinking which might be detrimental to him:
          our affection for him should induce us to ease his conscience in
          separating himself from us by means of some injustice which we
          voluntarily take upon ourselves.490.Those petty
          Truths.—“You know all that,
          but you have never lived through it—so I will not[pg 344]accept your evidence. Those‘petty truths’—you deem them petty
          because you have not paid for them with your blood!”—But are
          they really great, simply because they have been bought at so high
          a price? and blood is always too high a price!—“Do you really think so? How stingy you are with your
          blood!”491.Solitude,
          therefore!—A.So
          you wish to go back to your desert?B.I am
          not a quick thinker; I must wait for myself a long time—it is
          always later and later before the water from the fountain of my own
          ego spurts forth, and I have often to go thirsty longer than suits
          my patience. That is why I retire into solitude in order that I may
          not have to drink from the common cisterns. When I live in the
          midst of the multitude my life is like theirs, and I do not think
          like myself; but after some time it always seems to me as if the
          multitude wished to banish me from myself and to rob me of my soul.
          Then I get angry with all these people, and afraid of them; and I
          must have the desert to become well disposed again.492.Under the South
          Wind.—A.I
          can no longer understand myself! It was only yesterday that I felt
          myself so tempestuous and ardent, and at the same time so warm and
          sunny and exceptionally bright! but to-day! Now everything is calm,
          wide, oppressive, and dark like the lagoon at Venice. I wish for
          nothing, and[pg
          345]draw a deep breath, and yet I feel inwardly indignant at this“wish for nothing”—so the waves rise
          and fall in the ocean of my melancholy.B.You
          describe a petty, agreeable illness. The next wind from the
          north-east will blow it away.A.Why
          so?493.On One's own
          Tree.—A.No
          thinker's thoughts give me so much pleasure as my own: this, of
          course, proves nothing in favour of their value; but I should be
          foolish to neglect fruits which are tasteful to me only because
          they happen to grow on my own tree!—and I was once such a fool.B.Others have the contrary feeling: which likewise proves nothing in
          favour of their thoughts, nor yet is it any argument against their
          value.494.The Last
          Argument of the Brave Man.—There are snakes in this
          little clump of trees.—Very well, I will rush into the thicket and
          kill them.—But by doing that you will run the risk of falling a
          victim to them, and not they to you.—But what do I matter?495.Our
          Teachers.—During our period of youth we select our
          teachers and guides from our own times, and from those circles
          which we happen to meet with: we have the thoughtless conviction
          that the present age must have teachers who will suit[pg 346]us better than any others, and that we
          are sure to find them without having to look very far. Later on we
          find that we have to pay a heavy penalty for this childishness: we
          have to expiate our teachers in ourselves, and then perhaps we
          begin to look for the proper guides. We look for them throughout
          the whole world, including even present and past ages—but perhaps
          it may be too late, and at the worst we discover that they lived
          when we were young—and that at that time we lost our
          opportunity.496.The Evil
          Principle.—Plato has marvellously described how the
          philosophic thinker must necessarily be regarded as the essence of
          depravity in the midst of every existing society: for as the critic
          of all its morals he is naturally the antagonist of the moral man,
          and, unless he succeeds in becoming the legislator of new morals,
          he lives long in the memory of men as an instance of the“evil principle.”From this we may
          judge to how great an extent the city of Athens, although fairly
          liberal and fond of innovations, abused the reputation of Plato
          during his lifetime. What wonder then that he—who, as he has
          himself recorded, had the“political
          instinct”in his body—made three different attempts in
          Sicily, where at that time a united Mediterranean Greek State
          appeared to be in process of formation?It was in this
          State, and with its assistance, that Plato thought he could do for
          the Greeks what Mohammed did for the Arabs several centuries later:
          viz. establishing both minor and more important[pg 347]customs, and especially regulating the
          daily life of every man. His ideas were quite practicable just as
          certainly as those of Mohammed were practicable; for even much more
          incredible ideas, those of Christianity, proved themselves to be
          practicable! a few hazards less and a few hazards more—and then the
          world would have witnessed the Platonisation of Southern Europe;
          and, if we suppose that this state of things had continued to our
          own days, we should probably be worshipping Plato now as the“good principle.”But he was
          unsuccessful, and so his traditional character remains that of a
          dreamer and a Utopian—stronger epithets than these passed away with
          ancient Athens.497.The Purifying
          Eye.—We have the best reason for speaking of“genius”in men—for example, Plato,
          Spinoza, and Goethe—whose minds appear to be but loosely linked to
          their character and temperament, like winged beings which easily
          separate themselves from them, and then rise far above them. On the
          other hand, those who never succeeded in cutting themselves loose
          from their temperament, and who knew how to give to it the most
          intellectual, lofty, and at times even cosmic expression
          (Schopenhauer, for instance) have always been very fond of speaking
          about their genius.These geniuses
          could not rise above themselves, but they believed that, fly where
          they would, they would always find and recover themselves—this is
          their“greatness,”and this can be
          greatness!—The[pg
          348]others who are entitled to this name possess the pure and purifying
          eye which does not seem to have sprung out of their temperament and
          character, but separately from them, and generally in contradiction
          to them, and looks out upon the world as on a God whom it loves.
          But even people like these do not come into possession of such an
          eye all at once: they require practice and a preliminary school of
          sight, and he who is really fortunate will at the right moment also
          fall in with a teacher of pure sight.