498.Never
          Demand!—You do not know him! it is true that he
          easily and readily submits both to men and things, and that he is
          kind to both—his only wish is to be left in peace—but only in so
          far as men and things do notdemandhis submission. Any demand
          makes him proud, bashful, and warlike.499.The Evil
          One.—“Only the solitary are
          evil!”—thus spake Diderot, and Rousseau at once felt deeply
          offended. Thus he proved that Diderot was right. Indeed, in
          society, or amid social life, every evil instinct is compelled to
          restrain itself, to assume so many masks, and to press itself so
          often into the Procrustean bed of virtue, that we are quite
          justified in speaking of the martyrdom of the evil man. In
          solitude, however, all this disappears. The evil man is still more
          evil in solitude—and consequently for him whose eye sees only a
          drama everywhere he is also more beautiful.[pg 349]500.Against the
          Grain.—A thinker may for years at a time force
          himself to think against the grain: that is, not to pursue the
          thoughts that spring up within him, but, instead, those which he is
          compelled to follow by the exigencies of his office, an established
          division of time, or any arbitrary duty which he may find it
          necessary to fulfil. In the long run, however, he will fall ill;
          for this apparently moral self-command will destroy his nervous
          system as thoroughly and completely as regular debauchery.501.Mortal
          Souls.—Where knowledge is concerned perhaps the most
          useful conquest that has ever been made is the abandonment of the
          belief in the immortality of the soul. Humanity is henceforth at
          liberty to wait: men need no longer be in a hurry to swallow
          badly-tested ideas as they had to do in former times. For in those
          times the salvation of this poor“immortal
          soul”depended upon the extent of the knowledge which could
          be acquired in the course of a short existence: decisions had to be
          reached from one day to another, and“knowledge”was a matter of dreadful
          importance!Now we have
          acquired good courage for errors, experiments, and the provisional
          acceptance of ideas—all this is not so very important!—and for this
          very reason individuals and whole races may now face tasks so vast
          in extent that in former years they would have looked like madness,
          and defiance of[pg
          350]heaven and hell. Now we have the right to experiment upon
          ourselves! Yes, men have the right to do so! the greatest
          sacrifices have not yet been offered up to knowledge—nay, in
          earlier periods it would have been sacrilege, and a sacrifice of
          our eternal salvation, even to surmise such ideas as now precede
          our actions.502.One Word for
          three different Conditions.—When in a state of
          passion one man will be forced to let loose the savage, dreadful,
          unbearable animal. Another when under the influence of passion will
          raise himself to a high, noble, and lofty demeanour, in comparison
          with which his usual self appears petty. A third, whose whole
          person is permeated with nobility of feeling, has also the most
          noble storm and stress: and in this state he represents Nature in
          her state of savageness and beauty, and stands only one degree
          lower than Nature in her periods of greatness and serenity, which
          he usually represents. It is while in this state of passion,
          however, that men understand him better, and venerate him more
          highly at these moments—for then he is one step nearer and more
          akin to them. They feel at once delighted and horrified at such a
          sight and call it—divine.503.Friendship.—The objection
          to a philosophic life that it renders us useless to our friends
          would never have arisen in a modern mind: it belongs rather to
          classical antiquity. Antiquity knew the[pg 351]stronger bonds of friendship, meditated upon
          it, and almost took it to the grave with it. This is the advantage
          it has over us: we, on the other hand, can point to our
          idealisation of sexual love. All the great excellencies of ancient
          humanity owed their stability to the fact that man was standing
          side by side with man, and that no woman was allowed to put forward
          the claim of being the nearest and highest, nay even sole object of
          his love, as the feeling of passion would teach. Perhaps our trees
          do not grow so high now owing to the ivy and the vines that cling
          round them.504.Reconciliation.—Should it
          then be the task of philosophy to reconcile what the child has
          learnt with what the man has come to recognise? Should philosophy
          be the task of young men because they stand midway between child
          and man and possess intermediate necessities? It would almost
          appear to be so if you consider at what ages of their life
          philosophers are now in the habit of setting forth their
          conceptions: at a time when it is too late for faith and too early
          for knowledge.505.Practical
          People.—We thinkers have the right of deciding good
          taste in all things, and if necessary of decreeing it. The
          practical people finally receive it from us: their dependence upon
          us is incredibly great, and is one of the most[pg 352]ridiculous spectacles in the world,
          little though they themselves know it and however proudly they like
          to carp at us unpractical people. Nay, they would even go so far as
          to belittle their practical life if we should show a tendency to
          despise it—whereto at times we might be urged on by a slightly
          vindictive feeling.506.The Necessary
          Desiccation of Everything Good.—What! must we
          conceive of a work exactly in the spirit of the age that has
          produced it? but we experience greater delight and surprise, and
          get more information out of it when we do not conceive it in this
          spirit! Have you not remarked that every new and good work, so long
          as it is exposed to the damp air of its own age is least
          valuable—just because it still has about it all the odour of the
          market, of opposition, of modern ideas, and of all that is
          transient from day to day? Later on, however, it dries up, its“actuality”dies away: and then only
          does it obtain its deep lustre and its perfume—and also, if it is
          destined for it, the calm eye of eternity.507.Against the
          Tyranny of Truth.—Even if we were mad enough to
          consider all our opinions as truth, we should nevertheless not wish
          them alone to exist. I cannot see why we should ask for an
          autocracy and omnipotence of truth: it is sufficient for me to know
          that it is a great power.[pg
          353]Truth, however, must meet with opposition and be able to fight, and
          we must be able to rest from it at times in falsehood—otherwise
          truth will grow tiresome, powerless, and insipid, and will render
          us equally so.508.Not to take a
          Thing Pathetically.—What we do to benefit ourselves
          should not bring us in any moral praise, either from others or from
          ourselves, and the same remark applies to those things which we do
          to please ourselves. It is looked upon asbon
          tonamong superior men to refrain from taking things
          pathetically in such cases, and to refrain from all pathetic
          feelings: the man who has accustomed himself to this has retrieved
          hisnaïveté.509.The Third
          Eye.—What! You are still in need of the theatre! are
          you still so young? Be wise, and seek tragedy and comedy where they
          are better acted, and where the incidents are more interesting, and
          the actors more eager. It is indeed by no means easy to be merely a
          spectator in these cases—but learn! and then, amid all difficult or
          painful situations, you will have a little gate leading to joy and
          refuge, even when your passions attack you. Open your stage eye,
          that big third eye of yours, which looks out into the world through
          the other two.510.Escaping from
          One's Virtues.—Of what account is a thinker who does
          not know how to[pg
          354]escape from his own virtues occasionally! Surely a thinker should
          be more than“a moral being”!511.The
          Temptress.—Honesty is the great temptress of all
          fanatics.15What
          seemed to tempt Luther in the guise of the devil or a beautiful
          woman, and from which he defended himself in that uncouth way of
          his, was probably nothing but honesty, and perhaps in a few rarer
          cases even truth.512.Bold towards
          Things.—The man who, in accordance with his
          character, is considerate and timid towards persons, but is
          courageous and bold towards things, is afraid of new and closer
          acquaintances, and limits his old ones in order that he may thus
          make his incognito and his inconsiderateness coincide with
          truth.513.Limits and
          Beauty.—Are you looking for men with a fine culture?
          Then you will have to be satisfied with restricted views and
          sights, exactly as when you are looking for fine countries.—There
          are, of course, such panoramic men: they are like panoramic
          regions, instructive and marvellous: but not beautiful.[pg 355]514.To the
          Stronger.—Ye stronger and arrogant intellects, we ask
          you for only one thing: throw no further burdens upon our
          shoulders, but take some of our burdens upon your own, since ye are
          stronger! but ye delight in doing the exact contrary: for ye wish
          to soar, so that we must carry your burden in addition to our
          own—we must crawl!515.The Increase of
          Beauty.—Why has beauty increased by the progress of
          civilisation? because the three occasions for ugliness appear ever
          more rarely among civilised men: first, the wildest outbursts of
          ecstasy; secondly, extreme bodily exertion, and, thirdly, the
          necessity of inducing fear by one's very sight and presence—a
          matter which is so frequent and of so great importance in the lower
          and more dangerous stages of culture that it even lays down the
          proper gestures and ceremonials and makes ugliness a duty.516.Not to Imbue
          our Neighbours with Our own Demon.—Let us in our age
          continue to hold the belief that benevolence and beneficence are
          the characteristics of a good man; but let us not fail to add“provided that in the first place he
          exhibits his benevolence and beneficence towards himself.”For if he acts otherwise—that is to say, if he shuns, hates, or
          injures himself—he is certainly not a good[pg 356]man. He then merely saves himself through
          others: and let these others take care that they do not come to
          grief through him, however well disposed he may appear to be to
          them!—but to shun and hate one's own ego, and to live in and for
          others, this has up to the present, with as much thoughtlessness as
          conviction, been looked upon as“unselfish,”and consequently as“good.”517.Tempting into
          Love.—We ought to fear a man who hates himself; for
          we are liable to become the victims of his anger and revenge. Let
          us therefore try to tempt him into self-love.518.Resignation.—What is
          resignation? It is the most comfortable position of a patient, who,
          after having suffered a long time from tormenting pains in order to
          find it, at last became tired—and then found it.519.Deception.—When you wish
          to act you must close the door upon doubt, said a man of
          action.—And are you not afraid of being deceived in doing so?
          replied the man of a contemplative mind.520.Eternal
          Obsequies.—Both within and beyond the confines of
          history we might imagine that we[pg 357]were listening to a continual funeral
          oration: we have buried, and are still burying, all that we have
          loved best, our thoughts, and our hopes, receiving in exchange
          pride,gloria
          mundi—that is, the pomp of the graveside speech. It
          is thus that everything is made good! Even at the present time the
          funeral orator remains the greatest public benefactor.521.Exceptional
          Vanity.—Yonder man possesses one great quality which
          serves as a consolation for him: his look passes with contempt over
          the remainder of his being, and almost his entire character is
          included in this. But he recovers from himself when, as it were, he
          approaches his sanctuary; already the road leading to it appears to
          him to be an ascent on broad soft steps—and yet, ye cruel ones, ye
          call him vain on this account!522.Wisdom without
          Ears.—To hear every day what is said about us, or
          even to endeavour to discover what people think of us, will in the
          end kill even the strongest man. Our neighbours permit us to live
          only that they may exercise a daily claim upon us! They certainly
          would not tolerate us if we wished to claim rights over them, and
          still less if we wished to be right! In short, let us offer up a
          sacrifice to the general peace, let us not listen when they speak
          of us, when they praise us, blame us, wish for us, or hope for
          us—nay, let us not even think of it.[pg 358]523.A Question of
          Penetration.—When we are confronted with any
          manifestation which some one has permitted us to see, we may ask:
          what is it meant to conceal? What is it meant to draw our attention
          from? What prejudices does it seek to raise? and again, how far
          does the subtlety of the dissimulation go? and in what respect is
          the man mistaken?524.The Jealousy of
          the Lonely Ones.—This is the difference between
          sociable and solitary natures, provided that both possess an
          intellect: the former are satisfied, or nearly satisfied, with
          almost anything whatever; from the moment that their minds have
          discovered a communicable and happy version of it they will be
          reconciled even with the devil himself! But the lonely souls have
          their silent rapture, and their speechless agony about a thing:
          they hate the ingenious and brilliant display of their inmost
          problems as much as they dislike to see the women they love too
          loudly dressed—they watch her mournfully in such a case, as if they
          were just beginning to suspect that she was desirous of pleasing
          others. This is the jealousy which all lonely thinkers and
          passionate dreamers exhibit with regard to theesprit.525.The Effect of
          Praise.—Some people become modest when highly
          praised, others insolent.[pg 359]526.Unwilling to be
          a Symbol.—I sympathise with princes: they are not at
          liberty to discard their high rank even for a short time, and thus
          they come to know people only from the very uncomfortable position
          of constant dissimulation—their continual compulsion to represent
          something actually ends by making solemn ciphers of them.—Such is
          the fate of all those who deem it their duty to be symbols.527.The Hidden
          Men.—Have you never come across those people who
          check and restrain even their enraptured hearts, and who would
          rather become mute than lose the modesty of moderation? and have
          you never met those embarrassing, and yet so often good-natured
          people who do not wish to be recognised, and who time and again
          efface the tracks they have made in the sand? and who even deceive
          others as well as themselves in order to remain obscure and
          hidden?528.Unusual
          Forbearance.—It is often no small indication of
          kindness to be unwilling to criticise some one, and even to refuse
          to think of him.529.How Men and
          Nations gain Lustre.—How many really individual
          actions are left undone[pg
          360]merely because before performing them we perceive or suspect that
          they will be misunderstood!—those actions, for example, which have
          some intrinsic value, both in good and evil. The more highly an age
          or a nation values its individuals, therefore, and the more right
          and ascendancy we accord them, the more will actions of this kind
          venture to make themselves known,—and thus in the long run a lustre
          of honesty, of genuineness in good and evil, will spread over
          entire ages and nations, so that they—the Greeks, for example—like
          certain stars, will continue to shed light for thousands of years
          after their sinking.530.Digressions of
          the Thinker.—The course of thought in certain men is
          strict and inflexibly bold. At times it is even cruel towards such
          men, although considered individually they may be gentle and
          pliable. With well-meaning hesitation they will turn the matter ten
          times over in their heads, but will at length continue their strict
          course. They are like streams that wind their way past solitary
          hermitages: there are places in their course where the stream plays
          hide and seek with itself, and indulges in short idylls with
          islets, trees, grottos, and cascades—and then it rushes ahead once
          more, passes by the rocks, and forces its way through the hardest
          stones.531.Different
          Feelings Towards Art.—From the time when we begin to
          live as a hermit, consuming[pg 361]and consumed, our only company being deep and
          prolific thoughts, we expect from art either nothing more, or else
          something quite different from what we formerly expected—in a word,
          we change our taste. For in former times we wished to penetrate for
          a moment by means of art into the element in which we are now
          living permanently: at that time we dreamt ourselves into the
          rapture of a possession which we now actually possess. Indeed,
          flinging away from us for the time being what we now have, and
          imagining ourselves to be poor, or to be a child, a beggar, or a
          fool, may now at times fill us with delight.532.“Love Equalises.”—Love wishes to
          spare the other to whom it devotes itself any feeling of
          strangeness: as a consequence it is permeated with disguise and
          simulation; it keeps on deceiving continuously, and feigns an
          equality which in reality does not exist. And all this is done so
          instinctively that women who love deny this simulation and constant
          tender trickery, and have even the audacity to assert that love
          equalises (in other words that it performs a miracle)!This phenomenon
          is a simple matter if one of the two permits himself or herself to
          be loved, and does not deem it necessary to feign, but leaves this
          to the other. No drama, however, could offer a more intricate and
          confused instance than when both persons are passionately in love
          with one another; for in this case both are anxious to[pg 362]surrender and to endeavour to conform
          to the other, and finally they are both at a loss to know what to
          imitate and what to feign. The beautiful madness of this spectacle
          is too good for this world, and too subtle for human eyes.533.We
          Beginners.—How many things does an actor see and
          divine when he watches another on the stage! He notices at once
          when a muscle fails in some gesture; he can distinguish those
          little artificial tricks which are so calmly practised separately
          before the mirror, and are not in conformity with the whole; he
          feels when the actor is surprised on the stage by his own
          invention, and when he spoils it amid this surprise.—How
          differently, again, does a painter look at some one who happens to
          be moving before him! He will see a great deal that does not
          actually exist in order to complete the actual appearance of the
          person, and to give it its full effect. In his mind he attempts
          several different illuminations of the same object, and divides the
          whole by an additional contrast.—Oh, that we now possessed the eyes
          of such an actor and such a painter for the province of the human
          soul!534.Small
          Doses.—If we wish a change to be as deep and radical
          as possible, we must apply the remedy in minute doses, but
          unremittingly for long periods. What great action can be performed
          all[pg 363]at once? Let us
          therefore be careful not to exchange violently and precipitately
          the moral conditions with which we are familiar for a new valuation
          of things,—nay, we may even wish to continue living in the old way
          for a long time to come, until probably at some very remote period
          we become aware of the fact that the new valuation has made itself
          the predominating power within us, and that its minute doses to
          which we must henceforth become accustomed have set up a new nature
          within us.—We now also begin to understand that the last attempt at
          a great change of valuations—that which concerned itself with
          political affairs (the“great
          revolution”)—was nothing more than a pathetic and sanguinary
          piece of quackery which, by means of sudden crises, was able to
          inspire a credulous Europe with the hope of a sudden recovery, and
          has therefore made all political invalids impatient and dangerous
          up to this very moment.535.Truth Requires
          Power.—Truth in itself is no power at all, in spite
          of all that flattering rationalists are in the habit of saying to
          the contrary. Truth must either attract power to its side, or else
          side with power, for otherwise it will perish again and again. This
          has already been sufficiently demonstrated, and more than
          sufficiently!536.The
          Thumbscrew.—It is disgusting to observe with what
          cruelty every one charges his two or[pg 364]three private virtues to the account of
          others who may perhaps not possess them, and whom he torments and
          worries with them. Let us therefore deal humanely with the“sense of honesty,”although we may
          possess in it a thumbscrew with which we can worry to death all
          these presumptuous egoists who even yet wish to impose their own
          beliefs upon the whole world—we have tried this thumbscrew on
          ourselves!537.Mastery.—We have reached
          mastery when we neither mistake nor hesitate in the
          achievement.538.The Moral
          Insanity of Genius.—In a certain category of great
          intellects we may observe a painful and partly horrible spectacle:
          in their most productive moments their flights aloft and into the
          far distance appear to be out of harmony with their general
          constitution and to exceed their power in one way or another, so
          that each time there remains a deficiency, and also in the long run
          a defectiveness in the entire machinery, which latter is manifested
          among those highly intellectual natures by various kinds of moral
          and intellectual symptoms more regularly than by conditions of
          bodily distress.Thus those
          incomprehensible characteristics of their nature—all their
          timidity, vanity, hatefulness, envy, their narrow and narrowing
          disposition—and that too personal and awkward element in natures
          like those of Rousseau and Schopenhauer, may very[pg 365]well be the consequences of a
          periodical attack of heart disease; and this in its turn may be the
          result of a nervous complaint, and this latter the consequence of
          ——16So long as
          genius dwells within us we are full of audacity, yea, almost mad,
          and heedless of health, life, and honour; we fly through the day as
          free and swift as an eagle, and in the darkness we feel as
          confident as an owl.—But let genius once leave us and we are
          instantly overcome by a feeling of the most profound despondency:
          we can no longer understand ourselves; we suffer from everything
          that we experience and do not experience; we feel as if we were in
          the midst of shelterless rocks with the tempest raging round us,
          and we are at the same time like pitiful childish souls, afraid of
          a rustle or a shadow.—Three-fourths of all the evil committed in
          the world is due to timidity; and this is above all a physiological
          process.539.Do you know
          what you Want?—Have you never been troubled by the
          fear that you might not be at all fitted for recognising what is
          true? by the fear that your senses might be too dull, and even your
          delicacy of sight far too blunt? If you could only perceive, even
          once, to what extent your volition dominates your sight! How, for
          example, you wished yesterday to see more than some one else, while
          to-day you wish to see it differently! and how from the start you
          were anxious to see[pg
          366]something which would be in conformity with or in opposition to
          anything that people thought they had observed up to the present.
          Oh, those shameful cravings! How often you keep your eyes open for
          what is efficacious, for what is soothing, just because you happen
          to be tired at the moment! Always full of secret predeterminations
          of what truth should be like, so that you—you, forsooth!—might
          accept it! or do you think that to-day, because you are as frozen
          and dry as a bright winter morning, and because nothing is weighing
          on your mind, you have better eyesight! Are not ardour and
          enthusiasm necessary to do justice to the creations of thought?—and
          this indeed is what is called sight! as if you could treat matters
          of thought any differently from the manner in which you treat men.
          In all relations with thought there is the same morality, the same
          honesty of purpose, the samearrière-pensée, the same
          slackness, the same faint-heartedness—your whole lovable and
          hateful self! Your physical exhaustion will lend the things pale
          colours whilst your feverishness will turn them into monsters! Does
          not your morning show the things in a different light from the
          evening? Are you not afraid of finding in the cave of all knowledge
          your own phantom, the veil in which truth is wrapped up and hidden
          from your sight? Is it not a dreadful comedy in which you so
          thoughtlessly wish to take part?540.Learning.—Michelangelo
          considered Raphael's genius as having been acquired by study, and
          upon[pg 367]his own as a natural
          gift: learning as opposed to talent; though this is mere pedantry,
          with all due respect to the great pedant himself. For what is
          talent but a name for an older piece of learning, experience,
          exercise, appropriation, and incorporation, perhaps as far back as
          the times of our ancestors, or even earlier! And again: he who
          learns forms his own talents, only learning is not such an easy
          matter and depends not only upon our willingness, but also upon our
          being able to learn at all.Jealousy often
          prevents this in an artist, or that pride which, when it
          experiences any strange feeling, at once assumes an attitude of
          defence instead of an attitude of scholarly receptiveness. Raphael,
          like Goethe, lacked this pride, on which account they were great
          learners, and not merely the exploiters of those quarries which had
          been formed by the manifold genealogy of their forefathers. Raphael
          vanishes before our eyes as a learner in the midst of that
          assimilation of what his great rival calledhis“nature”: this noblest of all
          thieves daily carried off a portion of it; but before he had
          appropriated all the genius of Michelangelo he died—and the final
          series of his works, because it is the beginning of a new plan of
          study, is less perfect and good, for the simple reason that the
          great student was interrupted by death in the midst of his most
          difficult task, and took away with him that justifying and final
          goal which he had in view.