541.How we should
          turn to Stone.—By slowly, very, very slowly, becoming
          hard like a[pg
          368]precious stone, and at last lie still, a joy to all eternity.542.The Philosopher
          and Old Age.—It is not wise to permit evening to act
          as a judge of the day; for only too often in this case weariness
          becomes the judge of success and good will. We should also take the
          greatest precautions in regard to everything connected with old age
          and its judgment upon life, more especially since old age, like the
          evening, is fond of assuming a new and charming morality, and knows
          well enough how to humiliate the day by the glow of the evening
          skies, twilight and a peaceful and wistful silence. The reverence
          which we feel for an old man, especially if he is an old thinker
          and sage, easily blinds us to the deterioration of his intellect,
          and it is always necessary to bring to light the hidden symptoms of
          such a deterioration and lassitude, that is to say, to uncover the
          physiological phenomenon which is still concealed behind the old
          man's moral judgments and prejudices, in case we should be deceived
          by our veneration for him, and do something to the disadvantage of
          knowledge. For it is not seldom that the illusion of a great moral
          renovation and regeneration takes possession of the old man. Basing
          his views upon this, he then proceeds to express his opinions on
          the work and development of his life as if he had only then for the
          first time become clearsighted—and nevertheless it is not wisdom,
          but fatigue, which prompts his present state of well-being and his
          positive judgments.[pg
          369]The most
          dangerous indication of this weariness is above all the belief in
          genius, which as a rule only arises in great and semi-great men of
          intellect at this period of their lives: the belief in an
          exceptional position, and exceptional rights. The thinker who thus
          believes himself to be inspired by genius henceforth deems it
          permissible for him to take things more easily, and takes advantage
          of his position as a genius to decree rather than to prove. It is
          probable, however, that the need felt by the weary intellect for
          alleviation is the main source of this belief—it precedes it in
          time, though appearances may indicate the contrary.At this time
          too, as the result of the love which all weary and old people feel
          for enjoyment, such men as those I am speaking of wish to enjoy the
          results of their thinking instead of again testing them and
          scattering the seeds abroad once more. This leads them to make
          their thoughts palatable and enjoyable, and to take away their
          dryness, coldness, and want of flavour; and thus it comes about
          that the old thinker apparently raises himself above his life's
          work, while in reality he spoils it by infusing into it a certain
          amount of fantasy, sweetness, flavour, poetic mists, and mystic
          lights. This is how Plato ended, as did also that great and honest
          Frenchman, Auguste Comte, who, as a conqueror of the exact
          sciences, cannot be matched either among the Germans or the
          Englishmen of this century.There is a third
          symptom of fatigue: that ambition which actuated the great thinker
          when he was young, and which could not then find anything[pg 370]to satisfy it, has
          also grown old, and, like one that has no more time to lose, it
          begins to snatch at the coarser and more immediate means of its
          gratification, means which are peculiar to active, dominating,
          violent, and conquering dispositions. From this time onwards the
          thinker wishes to found institutions which shall bear his name,
          instead of erecting mere brain-structures. What are now to him the
          ethereal victories and honours to be met with in the realm of
          proofs and refutations, or the perpetuation of his fame in books,
          or the thrill of exultation in the soul of the reader? But the
          institution, on the other hand, is a temple, as he well knows—a
          temple of stone, a durable edifice, which will keep its god alive
          with more certainty than the sacrifices of rare and tender
          souls.17Perhaps, too, at
          this period of his life the old thinker will for the first time
          meet with that love which is fitted for a god rather than for a
          human being, and his whole nature becomes softened and sweetened in
          the rays of such a sun, like fruit in autumn. Yes, he grows more
          divine and beautiful, this great old man,—and nevertheless it is
          old age and weariness which permit him to ripen in this way, to
          grow more silent, and to repose in the luminous adulation of a
          woman. Now it is all up with his former desire—a desire which was
          superior even to his own ego—for real disciples, followers who
          would carry on his thought, that is, true opponents. This desire
          arose from his hitherto undiminished energy, the conscious pride he
          felt in[pg
          371]being able at any time to become an opponent himself,—nay, even the
          deadly enemy of his own doctrine,—but now his desire is for
          resolute partisans, unwavering comrades, auxiliary forces, heralds,
          a pompous train of followers. He is now no longer able to bear that
          dreadful isolation in which every intellect that advances beyond
          the others is compelled to live. From this time forward he
          surrounds himself with objects of veneration, companionship,
          tenderness, and love; but he also wishes to enjoy the privileges of
          all religious people, and to worship what he venerates most highly
          in his little community—he will even go as far as to invent a
          religion for the purpose of having a community.Thus lives the
          wise old man, and in living thus he falls almost imperceptibly into
          such a deplorable proximity to priestly and poetic extravagances
          that it is difficult to recollect all his wise and severe period of
          youth, the former rigid morality of his mind, and his truly virile
          dread of fancies and misplaced enthusiasm. When he was formerly in
          the habit of comparing himself with the older thinkers, he did so
          merely that he might measure his weakness against their strength,
          and that he might become colder and more audacious towards himself;
          but now he only makes this comparison to intoxicate himself with
          his own delusions. Formerly he looked forward with confidence to
          future thinkers, and he even took a delight in imagining himself to
          be cast into the shade by their brighter light. Now, however, he is
          mortified to think that he cannot be the last: he endeavours to
          discover some way of[pg
          372]imposing upon mankind, together with the inheritance which he is
          leaving to them, a restriction of sovereign thinking. He fears and
          reviles the pride and the love of freedom of individual minds:
          after him no one must allow his intellect to govern with absolute
          unrestriction: he himself wishes to remain for ever the bulwark on
          which the waves of ideas may break—these are his secret wishes, and
          perhaps, indeed, they are not always secret.The hard fact
          upon which such wishes are based, however, is that he himself has
          come to a halt before his teaching, and has set up his boundary
          stone, his“thus far and no
          farther.”In canonising himself he has drawn up his own
          death warrant: from now on his mind cannot develop further. His
          race is run; the hour-hand stops. Whenever a great thinker tries to
          make himself a lasting institution for posterity, we may readily
          suppose that he has passed the climax of his powers, and is very
          tired, very near the setting of his sun.543.We must not
          make Passion an Argument for Truth.—Oh, you
          kind-hearted and even noble enthusiasts, I know you! You wish to
          seem right in our eyes as well as in your own, but especially in
          your own!—and an irritable and subtle evil conscience so often
          spurs you on against your very enthusiasm! How ingenious you then
          become in deceiving your conscience, and lulling it to sleep! How
          you hate honest, simple, and clean souls; how you avoid their
          innocent glances! That better knowledge whose representatives they
          are, and[pg
          373]whose voice you hear only too distinctly within yourselves when it
          questions your belief,—how you try to cast suspicion upon it as a
          bad habit, as a disease of the age, as the neglect and infection of
          your own intellectual health! It drives you on to hate even
          criticism, science, reason! You must falsify history to make it
          testify in your favour; you must deny virtues in case they should
          obscure those of your own idols and ideals.Coloured images
          where arguments are needed! Ardour and power of expression! Silver
          mists! Ambrosian nights! well do you know how to enlighten and to
          darken—to darken by means of light! and indeed when your passion
          can no longer be kept within bounds the moment comes when you say
          to yourselves,“Now I have won for myself a
          good conscience, now I am exalted, courageous, self-denying,
          magnanimous; now I am honest!”How you long for these
          moments when your passion will confer upon you full and absolute
          rights, and also, as it were, innocence. How happy you are when
          engaged in battle and inspired with ecstasy or courage, when you
          are elated beyond yourself, when gnawing doubt has left you, and
          when you can even decree:“Any man who is
          not in ecstasy as we are cannot by any chance know what or where
          truth is.”How you long to meet with those who share your
          belief in this state—which is a state of intellectual depravity—and
          to set your own fire alight with their flames! Oh, for your
          martyrdom, your victory of the sanctified lie! Must you really
          inflict so much pain upon yourselves?—Mustyou?[pg 374]544.How Philosophy
          is now Practised.—I can see quite well that our
          philosophising youths, women, and artists require from philosophy
          exactly the opposite of what the Greeks derived from it. What does
          he who does not hear the continual exultation that resounds through
          every speech and counter-argument in a Platonic dialogue, this
          exultation over the new invention of rational thinking, know about
          Plato or about ancient philosophy? At that time souls were filled
          with enthusiasm when they gave themselves up to the severe and
          sober sport of ideas, generalisations, refutations,—that enthusiasm
          which perhaps those old, great, severe, and prudent contrapuntists
          in music have also known. At that time the Greek palate still
          possessed that older and formerly omnipotent taste: and by the side
          of this taste their new taste appeared to be enveloped in so much
          charm that the divine art of dialectic was sung by hesitating
          voices as if its followers were intoxicated with the frenzy of
          love. That old form of thinking, however, was thought within the
          bounds of morality, and for it nothing existed but fixed judgments
          and established facts, and it had no reasons but those of
          authority. Thinking, therefore, was simply a matter of repetition,
          and all the enjoyment of speech and dialogue could only lie in
          their form.Wherever the
          substance of a thing is looked upon as eternal and universally
          approved, there is only one great charm, the charm of variable
          forms, that is, of fashion. Even in the poets ever since the[pg 375]time of Homer, and
          later on in the case of the sculptors, the Greeks did not enjoy
          originality, but its contrary. It was Socrates who discovered
          another charm, that of cause and effect, of reason and sequence,
          and we moderns have become so used to it, and have been brought up
          to the necessity of logic that we look upon it as the normal taste,
          and as such it cannot but be repugnant to ardent and presumptuous
          people. Such people are pleased by whatever stands out boldly from
          the normal: their more subtle ambition leads them to believe only
          too readily that they are exceptional souls, not dialectic and
          rational beings, but, let us say,“intuitive”beings gifted with an“inner sense,”or with a certain“intellectual perception.”Above all, however,
          they wish to be“artistic natures”with a genius in their heads, and a demon in their bodies, and
          consequently with special rights in this world and in the world to
          come—especially the divine privilege of being incomprehensible.And people like
          these are“going in for”philosophy
          nowadays! I fear they will discover one day that they have made a
          mistake—what they are looking for is religion!545.But we do not
          Believe you.—You would fain pass for psychologists,
          but we shall not allow it! Are we not to notice that you pretend to
          be more experienced, profound, passionate, and perfect than you
          actually are?—just as we notice in yonder painter that there is a
          trifling presumptuousness in[pg 376]his manner of wielding the brush, and in
          yonder musician that he brings forward his theme with the desire to
          make it appear superior to what it really is. Have you experienced
          history within yourselves, commotions, earthquakes, long and
          profound sadness, and sudden flashes of happiness? Have you acted
          foolishly with great and little fools? Have you really undergone
          the delusions and woe of the good people? and also the woe and the
          peculiar happiness of the most evil? Then you may speak to me of
          morality, but not otherwise!546.Slave and
          Idealist.—The followers of Epictetus would doubtless
          not be to the taste of those who are now striving after the ideal.
          The constant tension of his being, the indefatigable inward glance,
          the prudent and reserved incommunicativeness of his eye whenever it
          happens to gaze upon the outer world, and above all, his silence or
          laconic speech: all these are characteristics of the strictest
          fortitude,—and what would our idealists, who above all else are
          desirous of expansion, care for this? But in spite of all this the
          Stoic is not fanatical. He detests the display and boasting of our
          idealists: his pride, however great it may be, is not eager to
          disturb others. It permits of a certain gentle approach, and has no
          desire to spoil anybody's good humour—nay, it can even smile. A
          great deal of ancient humanity is to be seen exemplified in this
          ideal. The most excellent feature about it, however, is that the
          thinker is completely free from the[pg 377]fear of God, strictly believes in reason, and
          is no preacher of penitence.Epictetus was a
          slave: his ideal man is without any particular rank, and may exist
          in any grade of society, but above all he is to be sought in the
          deepest and lowest social classes, as the silent and
          self-sufficient man in the midst of a general state of servitude, a
          man who defends himself alone against the outer world, and is
          constantly living in a state of the highest fortitude. He is
          distinguished from the Christian especially, because the latter
          lives in hope in the promise of“unspeakable glory,”permits presents to be made
          to him, and expects and accepts the best things from divine love
          and grace, and not from himself. Epictetus, on the other hand,
          neither hopes nor allows his best treasure to be given him—he
          possesses it already, holds it bravely in his hand, and defies the
          world to take it away from him. Christianity was devised for
          another class of ancient slaves, for those who had a weak will and
          weak reason—that is to say, for the majority of slaves.547.The Tyrants of
          the Intellect.—The progress of science is at the
          present time no longer hindered by the purely accidental fact that
          man attains to about seventy years, which was the case far too
          long. In former times people wished to master the entire extent of
          knowledge within this period, and all the methods of knowledge were
          valued according to this general desire. Minor[pg 378]questions and individual experiments
          were looked upon as unworthy of notice: people wanted to take the
          shortest path under the impression that, since everything in this
          world seemed to be arranged with a view to man's needs, even the
          acquirement of knowledge was regulated in view of the limits of
          human life.To solve
          everything at a single stroke, with one word—this was the secret
          desire; and the task was represented in the symbol of the Gordian
          knot or the egg of Columbus. No one doubted that it was possible to
          reach the goal of knowledge after the manner of Alexander or
          Columbus, and to settle all questions with one answer.“There is a mystery to be solved,”seemed to be
          the aim of life in the eyes of the philosopher: it was necessary in
          the first place to find out what this enigma was, and to condense
          the problem of the world into the simplest enigmatical formula
          possible. The boundless ambition and delight of being the“unraveller of the world”charmed
          the dreams of many a thinker: nothing seemed to him worth troubling
          about in this world but the means of bringing everything to a
          satisfactory conclusion. Philosophy thus became a kind of supreme
          struggle for the tyrannical sway over the intellect, and no one
          doubted that such a tyrannical domination was reserved for some
          very happy, subtle, ingenious, bold, and powerful person—a single
          individual!—and many (the last was Schopenhauer) fancied themselves
          to be this privileged person.From this it
          follows that, on the whole, science has up to the present remained
          in a rather backward[pg
          379]state owing to the moral narrow-mindedness of its disciples, and
          that henceforth it will have to be pursued from a higher and more
          generous motive.“What do I matter?”is written over the door of the thinker of the future.548.Victory Over
          Power.—If we consider all that has been venerated up
          to the present as“superhuman
          intellect”or“genius,”we
          must come to the sad conclusion that, considered as a whole, the
          intellectuality of mankind must have been extremely low and poor:
          so little mind has hitherto been necessary in order to feel at once
          considerably superior to all this! Alas for the cheap glory of“genius”! How quickly has it been
          raised to the throne, and its worship grown into a custom! We still
          fall on our knees before power—according to the old custom of
          slaves—and nevertheless, when the degree of venerability comes to
          be determined, only the degree of reason in the power will be the
          deciding factor. We must find out, indeed, to how great an extent
          power has been overcome by something higher, which it now obeys as
          a tool and instrument.As yet, however,
          there have been too few eyes for such investigations: even in the
          majority of cases the mere valuation of genius has almost been
          looked upon as blasphemy. And thus perhaps everything that is most
          beautiful still takes place in the midst of darkness and vanishes
          in endless night almost as soon as it has made its appearance,—I[pg 380]refer to the
          spectacle of that power which a genius does not lay out upon works,
          but upon himself as a work, that is, his own self-control, the
          purifying of his own imagination, the order and selection in his
          inspirations and tasks. The great man ever remains invisible in the
          greatest thing that claims worship, like some distant star: his
          victory over power remains without witnesses, and hence also
          without songs and singers. The hierarchy of the great men in all
          the past history of the human race has not yet been determined.549.Flight from
          One's Self.—Those sufferers from intellectual spasms
          who are impatient towards themselves and look upon themselves with
          a gloomy eye—such as Byron or Alfred de Musset—and who, in
          everything that they do, resemble runaway horses, and from their
          own works derive only a transient joy and an ardent passion which
          almost bursts their veins, followed by sterility and
          disenchantment—how are they able to bear up! They would fain attain
          to something“beyond themselves.”If
          we happen to be Christians, and are seized by such a desire as
          this, we strive to reach God and to become one with Him; if we are
          a Shakespeare we shall be glad to perish in images of a passionate
          life; if we are like Byron we long for actions, because these
          detach us from ourselves to an even greater extent than thoughts,
          feelings, and works.And should the
          desire for performing great deeds really be at bottom nothing but a
          flight from our own selves?—as Pascal would ask us. And indeed[pg 381]this assertion might
          be proved by considering the most noble representations of this
          desire for action: in this respect let us remember, bringing the
          knowledge of an alienist to our aid, that four of the greatest men
          of all ages who were possessed of this lust for action were
          epileptics—Alexander the Great, Cæsar, Mohammed, and Napoleon; and
          Byron likewise was subject to the same complaint.550.Knowledge and
          Beauty.—If men, as they are still in the habit of
          doing, reserve their veneration and feelings of happiness for works
          of fancy and imagination, we should not be surprised if they feel
          chilled and displeased by the contrary of fancy and imagination.
          The rapture which arises from even the smallest, sure, and definite
          step in advance into insight, and which our present state of
          science yields to so many in such abundance—this rapture is in the
          meantime not believed in by all those who are in the habit of
          feeling enraptured only when they leave reality altogether and
          plunge into the depths of vague appearance—romanticism. These
          people look upon reality as ugly, but they entirely overlook the
          fact that the knowledge of even the ugliest reality is beautiful,
          and that the man who can discern much and often is in the end very
          far from considering as ugly the main items of that reality, the
          discovery of which has always inspired him with the feeling of
          happiness.Is there
          anything“beautiful in itself”? The
          happiness of those who can recognise augments the beauty of the
          world, bathing everything that exists[pg 382]in a sunnier light: discernment not only
          envelops all things in its own beauty, but in the long run
          permeates the things themselves with its beauty—may ages to come
          bear witness to the truth of this statement! In the meantime let us
          recall an old experience: two men so thoroughly different in every
          respect as Plato and Aristotle were agreed in regard to what
          constituted superior happiness—not merely their own and that of men
          in general, but happiness in itself, even the happiness of the
          gods. They found this happiness to lie in knowledge, in the
          activity of a well practised and inventive understanding (not in“intuition”like the German
          theologians and semi-theologians; not in visions, like the mystics;
          and not in work, like the merely practical men). Similar opinions
          were expressed by Descartes and Spinoza. What great delight must
          all these men have felt in knowledge! and how great was the danger
          that their honesty might give way, and that they themselves might
          become panegyrists of things!551.Future
          Virtues.—How has it come about that, the more
          intelligible the world has become, the more all kinds of ceremonies
          have diminished? Was fear so frequently the fundamental basis of
          that awe which overcame us at the sight of anything hitherto
          unknown and mysterious, and which taught us to fall upon our knees
          before the unintelligible, and to beg for mercy? And has the world,
          perhaps, through the very fact that we have[pg 383]grown less timid, lost some of the
          charms it formerly had for us? Is it not possible that our own
          dignity and stateliness, our formidable character, has decreased
          together with our spirit of dread? Perhaps we value the world and
          ourselves less highly since we have begun to think more boldly
          about it and ourselves? Perhaps there will come a moment in the
          future when this courageous spirit of thinking will have reached
          such a point that it will feel itself soaring in supreme pride, far
          above men and things—when the wise man, being also the boldest,
          will see himself and even more particularly existence, the lowest
          of all beneath himself?This type of
          courage, which is not far removed from excessive generosity, has
          been lacking in humanity up to the present.—Oh, that our poets
          might once again become what they once were: seers, telling us
          something about what might possibly happen! now that what is real
          and what is past are being ever more and more taken from them, and
          must continue to be taken from them—for the time of innocent
          counterfeiting is at an end! Let them try to enable us to
          anticipate future virtues, or virtues that will never be found on
          earth, although they may exist somewhere in the
          world!—purple-glowing constellations and whole Milky Ways of the
          beautiful! Where are ye, ye astronomers of the ideal?552.Ideal
          Selfishness.—Is there a more sacred state than that
          of pregnancy? To perform every[pg 384]one of our actions in the silent conviction
          that in one way or another it will be to the benefit of that which
          is being generated within us—that it must augment its mysterious
          value, the very thought of which fills us with rapture? At such a
          time we refrain from many things without having to force ourselves
          to do so: we suppress the angry word, we grasp the hand
          forgivingly; our child must be born from all that is best and
          gentlest. We shun our own harshness and brusqueness in case it
          should instil a drop of unhappiness into the cup of the beloved
          unknown. Everything is veiled, ominous; we know nothing about what
          is going on, but simply wait and try to be prepared. During this
          time, too, we experience a pure and purifying feeling of profound
          irresponsibility, similar to that felt by a spectator before a
          drawn curtain;itis growing,itis
          coming to light; we have nothing to do with determining its value,
          or the hour of its arrival. We are thrown back altogether upon
          indirect, beneficent and defensive influences.“Something greater than we are is growing
          here”—such is our most secret hope: we prepare everything
          with a view to his birth and prosperity—not merely everything that
          is useful, but also the noblest gifts of our souls.We should, and
          can, live under the influence of such a blessed inspiration!
          Whether what we are looking forward to is a thought or a deed, our
          relationship to every essential achievement is none other than that
          of pregnancy, and all our vainglorious boasting about“willing”and“creating”should be cast to the winds! True and
          ideal[pg 385]selfishness consists
          in always watching over and restraining the soul, so that our
          productiveness may come to a beautiful termination. Thus in this
          indirect manner we must provide for and watch over the good of all;
          and the frame of mind, the mood in which we live, is a kind of
          soothing oil which spreads far around us on the restless
          souls.—Still, these pregnant ones are funny people! let us
          therefore dare to be funny also, and not reproach others if they
          must be the same. And even when this phenomenon becomes dangerous
          and evil we must not show less respect to that which is generating
          within us or others than ordinary worldly justice, which does not
          allow the judge or the hangman to interfere with a pregnant
          woman.553.Circuitous
          Routes.—Where does all this philosophy mean to end
          with its circuitous routes? Does it do more than transpose into
          reason, so to speak, a continuous and strong impulse—a craving for
          a mild sun, a bright and bracing atmosphere, southern plants, sea
          breezes, short meals of meat, eggs, and fruit, hot water to drink,
          quiet walks for days at a time, little talking, rare and cautious
          reading, living alone, pure, simple, and almost soldier-like
          habits—a craving, in short, for all things which are suited to my
          own personal taste? a philosophy which is in the main the instinct
          for a personal regimen—an instinct that longs for my air, my
          height, my temperature, and my kind of health, and takes the
          circuitous route of my head to persuade me to it![pg 386]There are many
          other and certainly more lofty philosophies, and not only such as
          are more gloomy and pretentious than mine—and are they perhaps,
          taking them as a whole, nothing but intellectual circuitous routes
          of the same kind of personal impulses?—In the meantime I look with
          a new eye upon the mysterious and solitary flight of a butterfly
          high on the rocky banks of the lake where so many plants are
          growing: there it flies hither and thither, heedless of the fact
          that its life will last only one more day, and that the night will
          be too cold for its winged fragility. For it, too, a philosophy
          might be found, though it might not be my own.554.Leading.18—When
          we praise progress we only praise the movement and those who do not
          let us remain on the same spot, and in the circumstances this is
          certainly something, especially if we live among Egyptians. In
          changeable Europe, however, where movement is“understood,”to use their own expression,“as a matter of course”—alas, ifweonly understood something about
          it too!—I praise leaders and forerunners: that is to say, those who
          always leave themselves behind, and do not care in the least
          whether any one is following them or not.“Wherever I halt I find myself alone: why should I
          halt! the desert is still so wide!”—such is the sentiment of
          the true leader.[pg 387]555.The Least
          Important Are Sufficient.—We ought to avoid events
          when we know that even the least important of them frequently
          enough leave a strong impression upon us—and these we cannot
          avoid.—The thinker must possess an approximate canon of all the
          things he still wishes to experience.556.The Four
          Virtues.—Honest towards ourselves, and to all and
          everything friendly to us; brave in the face of our enemy; generous
          towards the vanquished; polite at all times: such do the four
          cardinal virtues wish us to be.557.Marching
          Against an Enemy.—How pleasant is the sound of even
          bad music and bad motives when we are setting out to march against
          an enemy!558.Not Concealing
          One's Virtues.—I love those men who are as
          transparent as water, and who, to use Pope's expression, hide not
          from view the turbid bottom of their stream. Even they, however,
          possess a certain vanity, though of a rare and more sublimated
          kind: some of them would wish us to see nothing but the mud, and to
          take no notice of the clearness of the water which enables us to
          look right to the bottom. No less a man than[pg 388]Gautama Buddha has imagined the vanity
          of these few in the formula,“Let your sins
          appear before men, and conceal your virtues.”But this would
          exhibit a disagreeable spectacle to the world—it would be a sin
          against good taste.559."Nothing in
          Excess!"—How often is the individual recommended to
          set up a goal which it is beyond his power to reach, in order that
          he may at least attain that which lies within the scope of his
          abilities and most strenuous efforts! Is it really so desirable,
          however, that he should do so? Do not the best men who try to act
          according to this doctrine, together with their best deeds,
          necessarily assume a somewhat exaggerated and distorted appearance
          on account of their excessive tension? and in the future will not a
          grey mist of failure envelop the world, owing to the fact that we
          may see everywhere struggling athletes and tremendous gestures, but
          nowhere a conqueror crowned with the laurel, and rejoicing in his
          victory?560.What we are
          Free to do.—We can act as the gardeners of our
          impulses, and—which few people know—we may cultivate the seeds of
          anger, pity, vanity, or excessive brooding, and make these things
          fecund and productive, just as we can train a beautiful plant to
          grow along trellis-work. We may do this with the good or bad taste
          of a[pg 389]gardener, and as it
          were, in the French, English, Dutch, or Chinese style. We may let
          nature take its own course, only trimming and embellishing a little
          here and there; and finally, without any knowledge or
          consideration, we may even allow the plants to spring up in
          accordance with their own natural growth and limitations, and fight
          out their battle among themselves,—nay, we can even take delight in
          such chaos, though we may possibly have a hard time with it! All
          this is at our option: but how many know that it is? Do not the
          majority of people believe in themselves as complete and perfect
          facts? and have not the great philosophers set their seal on this
          prejudice through their doctrine of the unchangeability of
          character?561.Letting our
          Happiness also Shine.—In the same way as painters are
          unable to reproduce the deep brilliant hue of the natural sky, and
          are compelled to use all the colours they require for their
          landscapes a few shades deeper than nature has made them—just as
          they, by means of this trick, succeed in approaching the brilliancy
          and harmony of nature's own hues, so also must poets and
          philosophers, for whom the luminous rays of happiness are
          inaccessible, endeavour to find an expedient. By picturing all
          things a shade or two darker than they really are, their light, in
          which they excel, will produce almost exactly the same effect as
          the sunlight, and will resemble the light of true happiness.—The
          pessimist, on the other hand, who paints[pg 390]all things in the blackest and most sombre
          hues, only makes use of bright flames, lightning, celestial
          glories, and everything that possesses a glaring, dazzling power,
          and bewilders our eyes: to him light only serves the purpose of
          increasing the horror, and of making us look upon things as being
          more dreadful than they really are.