562.The Settled and
          the Free.—It is only in the Underworld that we catch
          a glimpse of that gloomy background of all that bliss of adventure
          which forms an everlasting halo around Ulysses and his like,
          rivalling the eternal phosphorescence of the sea,—that background
          which we can never forget: the mother of Ulysses died of grief and
          yearning for her child. The one is driven on from place to place,
          and the heart of the other, the tender stay-at-home friend, breaks
          through it—so it always is. Affliction breaks the hearts of those
          who live to see that those whom they love best are deserting their
          former views and faith,—it is a tragedy brought about by the free
          spirits,—a tragedy which, indeed, occasionally comes to their own
          knowledge. Then, perhaps, they too, like Ulysses, will be forced to
          descend among the dead to get rid of their sorrow and to relieve
          their affliction.563.The Illusion of
          the Moral Order of the Universe.—There is no“eternal justice”which[pg 391]requires that every fault shall be
          atoned and paid for,—the belief that such a justice existed was a
          terrible delusion, and useful only to a limited extent; just as it
          is also a delusion that everything is guilt which is felt as such.
          It is not the things themselves, but the opinions about things that
          do not exist, which have been such a source of trouble to
          mankind.564.By the Side of
          Experience.—Even great intellects have only a
          hand-breadth experience—in the immediate proximity of this
          experience their reflection ceases, and its place is taken by
          unlimited vacuity and stupidity.565.Dignity and
          Ignorance.—Wherever we understand we become amiable,
          happy, and ingenious; and when we have learnt enough, and have
          trained our eyes and ears, our souls show greater plasticity and
          charm. We understand so little, however, and are so insufficiently
          informed, that it rarely happens that we seize upon a thing and
          make ourselves lovable at the same time,—on the contrary we pass
          through cities, nature, and history with stiffness and
          indifference, at the same time taking a pride in our stiff and
          indifferent attitude, as if it were simply due to superiority. Thus
          our ignorance and our mediocre desire for knowledge understand
          quite well how to assume a mask of dignity and character.[pg 392]566.Living
          Cheaply.—The cheapest and most innocent mode of life
          is that of the thinker; for, to mention at once its most important
          feature, he has the greatest need of those very things which others
          neglect and look upon with contempt. In the second place he is
          easily pleased and has no desire for any expensive pleasures. His
          task is not difficult, but, so to speak, southern; his days and
          nights are not wasted by remorse; he moves, eats, drinks, and
          sleeps in a manner suited to his intellect, in order that it may
          grow calmer, stronger, and clearer. Again, he takes pleasure in his
          body and has no reason to fear it; he does not require society,
          except from time to time in order that he may afterwards go back to
          his solitude with even greater delight. He seeks and finds in the
          dead compensation for the living, and can even replace his friends
          in this way—viz., by seeking out among the dead the best who have
          ever lived.—Let us consider whether it is not the contrary desires
          and habits which have made the life of man expensive, and as a
          consequence difficult and often unbearable. In another sense,
          however, the thinker's life is certainly the most expensive, for
          nothing is too good for him; and it would be an intolerable
          privation for him to be deprived of the best.567.In the
          Field.—“We should take things
          more cheerfully than they deserve; especially because for[pg 393]a very long time we
          have taken them more seriously than they deserved.”So speak
          the brave soldiers of knowledge.568.Poet and
          Bird.—The bird Phœnix showed the poet a glowing
          scroll which was being gradually consumed in the flames.“Be not alarmed,”said the bird,“it is your work! It does not contain the
          spirit of the age, and to a still less extent the spirit of those
          who are against the age: so it must be burnt. But that is a good
          sign. There is many a dawn of day.”569.To the Lonely
          Ones.—If we do not respect the honour of others in
          our soliloquies as well as in what we say publicly, we are not
          gentlemen.570.Losses.—There are some
          losses which communicate to the soul a sublimity in which it ceases
          from wailing, and wanders about silently, as if in the shade of
          some high and dark cypresses.571.The
          Battle-Field Dispensary of the Soul.—What is the most
          efficacious remedy?—Victory.572.Life shall
          Comfort Us.—If, like the thinker, we live habitually
          amid the great current of ideas[pg 394]and feelings, and even our dreams follow this
          current, we expect comfort and peacefulness from life, while others
          wish to rest from life when they give themselves up to
          meditation.573.Casting One's
          Skin.—The snake that cannot cast its skin perishes.
          So too with those minds which are prevented from changing their
          views: they cease to be minds.574.Never
          Forget!—The higher we soar the smaller we appear to
          those who cannot fly.575.We Aeronauts of
          the Intellect.—All those daring birds that soar far
          and ever farther into space, will somewhere or other be certain to
          find themselves unable to continue their flight, and they will
          perch on a mast or some narrow ledge—and will be grateful even for
          this miserable accommodation! But who could conclude from this that
          there was not an endless free space stretching far in front of
          them, and that they had flown as far as they possibly could? In the
          end, however, all our great teachers and predecessors have come to
          a standstill, and it is by no means in the noblest or most graceful
          attitude that their weariness has brought them to a pause: the same
          thing will happen to you and me! but what does this matter[pg 395]to either of us?Other
          birds will fly farther!Our minds and hopes vie with
          them far out and on high; they rise far above our heads and our
          failures, and from this height they look far into the distant
          horizon and see hundreds of birds much more powerful than we are,
          striving whither we ourselves have also striven, and where all is
          sea, sea, and nothing but sea!And where, then,
          are we aiming at? Do we wish to cross the sea? whither does this
          over-powering passion urge us, this passion which we value more
          highly than any other delight? Why do we fly precisely in this
          direction, where all the suns of humanity have hitherto set? Is it
          possible that people may one day say of us that we also steered
          westward, hoping to reach India—but that it was our fate to be
          wrecked on the infinite? Or, my brethren? or—?