46Here the outlook is free.—When a philosopher holds his tongue it may
be the sign of the loftiness of his soul: when he contradicts himself
it may be love; and the very courtesy of a knight of knowledge may
force him to lie. It has been said, and not without subtlety:—il
est indigne des grands cœurs de répandre le trouble qu’ils
ressentent[8]:but it is necessary to add that there may also begrandeur de cœurin not shrinkingfrom the most undignified
proceeding.A woman who loves sacrifices her honour; a knight of
knowledge who “loves,” sacrifices perhaps his humanity; a God who
loved, became a Jew....47Beauty no accident—Even the beauty of a race or of a family,
the charm and perfection of all its movements, is attained with
pains: like genius it is the final result of the accumulated work
of generations. Great sacrifices must have been made on the altar
ol good taste, for its sake many things must have been done, and
much must have been left undone—the seventeenth century in France
is admirable for both ofthese things,—in this century there must
have been a principle of selection in respect to company, locality,
clothing, the gratification of the instinct of sex; beauty must have
been preferred to profit, to habit, to opinion and to indolence. The
first rule of all:—nobody must “let himself go,” not even when he is
alone.—Good things are exceedingly costly:; and in all cases the law
obtains that he who possesses them is a different person from him who
isacquiringthem. Everything good is an inheritance: that which is
not inherited is imperfect, it is simply a beginning. In Athens at
the time of Cicero—who expresses his surprise at the fact—the men
and youths were by far superior in beauty to the women: but what hard
work and exertions the male sex had for centuries imposed upon itself
in the service of beauty! We must not be mistaken in regard to the
method employed here: the mere discipline of feelings and thoughts
is little better than nil (—it is in this that the great error of
German culture, which is quite illusory, lies): thebodymust be
persuaded first. The strict maintenance of a distinguished and tasteful
demeanour, the obligation of frequenting only those who do not “let
themselves go,” is amply sufficient to render one distinguished and
tasteful: in two or three generations everything has alreadytaken
deep root.The fate of a people and of humanity is decided according
to whether they begin culture at theright place—notat the “soul”
(as the fatal superstition of the priests and half-priests would have
it): the right place is the body, demeanour, diet, physiology—the rest
follows as the night the day.... That is why the Greeks remain thefirst event inculture—they knew and theydidwhat was needful.
Christianity with its contempt of the body is the greatest mishap that
has ever befallen mankind.48Progress in my sense.—I also speak of a “return to nature,” although
it is not a process of going back but of going up—up into lofty, free
and even terrible nature and naturalness; such a nature as can play
with great tasks andmayplay with them.... To speak in aparable.Napoleon was an example of a “return to nature,” as I understand it
(for instancein rebus tacticis,and still more, as military experts
know, in strategy). But Rousseau—whither did he want to return?
Rousseau this first modern man, idealist andcanaillein one person;
who was in need of moral “dignity,” in order even to endure the sight
of his own person,—ill with unbridled vanity and wanton self-contempt;
this abortion, who planted his tent on the threshold of modernity,
also wanted a “return to nature”; but, I ask once more, whither did
he wish to return? I hate Rousseau, eveninthe Revolution itself:
the latter was the historical expression of this hybrid of idealist
andcanaille.The bloody farce which this Revolution ultimately
became, its “immorality,” concerns me but slightly; what I loathe
however is its Rousseauesquemorality—the so-called “truths” of the
Revolution, by means of which it still exercises power and draws all
flat and mediocre things over to its side. The doctrine of equality!
... But there is no more deadly poison than this; for itseemsto
proceed from the very lips of justice, whereas in reality it draws
the curtaindown on all justice.... “To equals equality, to unequals
inequality”—that would be the real speech of justice and that which
follows from it “Never make unequal things equal.” The fact that so
much horror and blood are associated with this doctrine of equality,
has lent this “modern idea”par excellencesuch a halo of fire and
glory, that the Revolution as a drama has misled even the most noble
minds.—That after all is no reason for honouring it the more.—I can
see only one who regarded it as it should be regarded—that is to say,
withloathing;I speak of Goethe.49Goethe.—No mere German, but a European event: a magnificent attempt
to overcome the eighteenth century by means of a return to nature, by
means of an ascent to the naturalness of the Renaissance, a kind of
self-overcoming on the part of the century in question.—He bore the
strongest instincts of this century in his breast: its sentimentality,
and idolatry of nature, its anti-historic, idealistic, unreal, and
revolutionary spirit (—the latter is only a form of the unreal). He
enlisted history, natural science, antiquity, as well as Spinoza, and
above all practical activity, in his service. He drew a host of very
definite horizons around him; far from liberating himself from life, he
plunged right into it; he did not give in; he took as much as he could
on his own shoulders, and into his heart. That to which he aspired wastotality; he was opposed to the sundering of reason, sensuality,
feeling and will (as preached with most repulsive scholasticism
by Kant, the antipodes of Goethe); he disciplined himself into a
harmonious whole, hecreatedhimself. Goethe in themidst of an age
of unreal sentiment, was a convinced realist: he said yea to everything
that was like him in this regard,—there was no greater event in his
life than thatens realissimum, surnamed Napoleon. Goethe conceived
a strong, highly-cultured man, skilful in all bodily accomplishments,
able to keep himself in check, having a feeling of reverence for
himself, and so constituted as to be able to risk the full enjoyment
of naturalness in all its rich profusion and be strong enough for this
freedom; a man of tolerance, not out of weakness but out of strength,
because he knows how to turn to his own profit that which would ruin
the mediocre nature; a man unto whom nothing is any longer forbidden,
unless it be weakness either as a vice or as a virtue. Such a spirit,become free, appears in the middle of the universe with a feeling
of cheerful and confident fatalism; he believes that only individual
things are bad, and that as a whole the universe justifies and, affirms
itself—He no longer denies.... But such a faith is the highest Of
all faiths: I christened it with the name of Dionysus.50It might be said that, in a certain sense, the nineteenth century
also strove after all that Goethe himself aspired to: catholicity in
understanding, in approving; a certain reserve towards everything,
daring realism, and a reverence for every fact. How is it that
the total result of this is not a Goethe, but a state of chaos, a
nihilistic groan, an inability to discover where one is, an instinct
of fatigue whichin praxiis persistently driving Europeto hark
back to the eighteenth century? (—For instance in the form of maudlin
romanticism, altruism, hyper-sentimentality,pessimism in taste,
and socialism in politics). Is not the nineteenth century, at least
in its closing years, merely an accentuated, brutalised eighteenth
century,—that is to say a century of decadence? And has not Goethe
been—not alone for Germany, but also for the whole of Europe,—merely
an episode, a beautiful “in vain”? But great men are misunderstood when
they are regarded from the wretched standpoint of public utility. The
fact that no advantage can be derived from them—this in itself may
perhaps be peculiar to greatness.51Goethe is the last German whom I respect: he had understood three
things as I understand them. We also agree as to the “cross.”[9]People
often ask me why on earth I write inGerman:nowhere am I less read
than in the Fatherland. But who knows whether I evendesireto be
read at present?—To create things on which time may try its teeth in
vain; to be concerned both in the form and the substance of my writing,
about a certain degree of immortality—never have I been modest enough
to demand less of myself. The aphorism, the sentence, in both of
which I, as the first among Germans, am a master, are the forms of
“eternity”; it is my ambition to say in ten sentences what everyone
else says in a whole book,—what everyone else doesnotsay in a
whole book.I have given mankind the deepest book it possesses, myZarathustra;before long I shall give it the most independent one.[1]The German wordRauschas used by Nietzsche here,
suggests a blend of our two English words “intoxication” and
“elation.”—TR.[2]An allusion to a verse in Luther’s hymn: “Lass fahren
dahin...das Reich muss uns doch bleiben,” which Nietzsche applies
to the German Empire.—TR.[3]A disciple of Schopenhauer who blunted the sharpness
of his master’s Pessimism and who watered it down for modern
requirements.—TR.[4]Quotation from the Libretto of Mozart’s “Magic Flute” Act
I, Sc. 3.—TR.[5]This alludes to Parsifal. See my note on p. 96, vol. i.,
“The Will to Power.”—TR.[6]This is a playful adaptation of Max von Schenkendorfs poem
“Freiheit” The proper line reads: “Freiheit die ich meine” (The
freedom that I do mean).—TR.[7]See “Memoirs of a House of the Dead,” by Dostoiewsky
(translation by Marie von Thilo: “Buried Alive”).—TR.[8]Clothilde de Veaux.—TR.[9]See my note on p. 147 of Vol. I. of theWill to
Power.—TR.THINGS I OWE TO THE ANCIENTS1In conclusion I will just say a word concerning that world to which I
have sought new means of access, to which I may perhaps have found a
new passage—the ancient world. My taste, which is perhaps the reverse
of tolerant, is very far from saying yea through and through even to
this world: on the whole it is not over eager to sayYea,it would
prefer to sayNay,and better still nothing whatever.... This is true
of whole cultures; it is true of books,—it is also true of places
and of landscapes. Truth to tell, the number of ancient books that
count for something in my life is but small; and the most famous are
not of that number. My sense of style, for the epigram as style, was
awakened almost spontaneously upon my acquaintance with Sallust. I have
not forgotten the astonishment of my respected teacher Corssen, when
he was forced to give his worst Latin pupil the highest marks,—at one
stroke I had learned all there was to learn. Condensed, severe, with as
much substance as possible in the background, and with cold but roguish
hostility towards all “beautiful words” and “beautiful feelings”—in
these things I found my own particular bent. In my writings up to my
“Zarathustra,” there will be found a very earnest ambition to attain
to theRomanstyle, tothe “ære perennius” in style.—The same
thing happened on my first acquaintance with Horace. Up to the present
no poet has given me the same artistic raptures as those which from
the first I received from an Horatian ode. In certain languages it
would be absurd even to aspire to what is accomplished by this poet.
This mosaic of words, in which every unit spreads its power to the
left and to the right over the whole, by its sound, by its place in
the sentence, and by its meaning, thisminimumin the compass and
number of the signs, and themaximumof energy in the signs which is
thereby achieved—all this is Roman, and, if you will believe me, noblepar excellence.By the side of this all the rest of poetry becomes
something popular,—nothing more than senseless sentimental twaddle.2I am not indebted to the Greeks for anything like such strong
impressions; and, to speak frankly, they cannot be to us what the
Romans are. One cannotlearnfrom the Greeks—their style is too
strange, it is also too fluid, to be imperative or to have the effect
of a classic. Who would ever have learnt writing from a Greek! Who
would ever have learned it without the Romans!... Do not let anyone
suggest Plato to me. In regard to Plato I am a thorough sceptic, and
have never been able to agree to the admiration of Plato theartist,which is traditional among scholars. And after all, in this matter,
the most refined judges of taste in antiquity are on my side. In my
opinion Plato bundles all the forms of style pell-mell together,
in this respect he is oneof the first decadents of style: he has
something similar on his conscience to that which the Cynics had
who invented thesatura Menippea.For the Platonic dialogue—this
revoltingly self-complacent and childish kind of dialectics—to
exercise any charm over you, you must never have read any good French
authors,—Fontenelle for instance. Plato is boring. In reality my
distrust of Plato is fundamental. I find him so very much astray
from all the deepest instincts of the Hellenes, so steeped in moral
prejudices, so pre-existently Christian—the concept “good” is already
the highest value with him,—that rather than use any other expression
I would prefer to designate the whole phenomenon Plato with the hard
word “superior bunkum,” or, if you would like it better, “idealism.”
Humanity has had to pay dearly for this Athenian having gone to school
among the Egyptians (—or among the Jews in Egypt?...) In the great
fatality of Christianity, Plato is that double-faced fascination
called the “ideal,” which made it possible for the more noble natures
of antiquity to misunderstand themselves and to tread thebridgewhich led to the “cross.” And what an amount of Plato is still to be
found in the concept “church,” and in the construction, the system
and the practice of the church!—My recreation, my predilection, my
cure, after all Platonism, has always been Thucydides. Thucydides and
perhaps Machiavelli’sprincipeare most closely related to me owing
to the absolute determination which they show of refusing to deceive
themselves and of seeing reason inreality,—not in “rationality,”
and still less in “morality.” There is no more radical cure than
Thucydides for the lamentablyrose-coloured idealisation of the
Greeks which the “classically-cultured” stripling bears with him into
life, as a reward for his public school training. His writings must be
carefully studied line by line, and his unuttered thoughts must be read
as distinctly as what he actually says. There are few thinkers so rich
in unuttered thoughts. In him the culture “of the Sophists”—that is to
say, the culture of realism, receives its most perfect expression: this
inestimable movement in the midst of the moral and idealistic knavery
of the Socratic Schools which was then breaking out in all directions.
Greek philosophy is the decadence of the Greek instinct: Thucydides is
the great summing up, the final manifestation of that strong, severe
positivism which lay in the instincts of the ancient Hellene. After
all, it is courage in the face of reality that distinguishes such
natures as Thucydides from Plato: Plato is a coward in the face of
reality—consequently he takes refuge in the ideal: Thucydides is
master of himself,—consequently he is able to master life.3To rout up cases of “beautiful souls,” “golden means” and other
perfections among the Greeks, to admire, say, their calm grandeur,
their ideal attitude of mind, their exalted simplicity—from this
“exalted simplicity,” which after all is a piece ofniaiserie
allemande,I was preserved by the psychologist within me. I saw their
strongest instinct, the Will to Power, I saw them quivering with the
fierce violence of this instinct,—I saw all their institutions grow
out of measures of security calculated to preserveeach member of
their society from the innerexplosive materialthat lay in his
neighbour’s breast. This enormous internal tension thus discharged
itself in terrible and reckless hostility outside the state: the
various states mutually tore each other to bits, in order that each
individual state could remain at peace with itself. It was then
necessary to be strong; for danger lay close at hand,—it lurked in
ambush everywhere. The superb suppleness of their bodies, the daring
realism and immorality which is peculiar to the Hellenes, was a
necessity not an inherent quality. It was a result, it had not been
there from the beginning. Even their festivals and their arts were but
means in producing a feeling of superiority, and of showing it: they
are measures of self-glorification; and in certain circumstances of
making one’s self terrible.... Fancy judging the Greeks in the German
style, from their philosophers; fancy using the suburban respectability
of the Socratic schools as a key to what is fundamentally Hellenic!...
The philosophers are of course the decadents of Hellas, the
counter-movement directed against the old and noble taste(—against the
agonal instinct, against thePolls,against the value of the race,
against the authority of tradition), Socratic virtues were preached to
the Greeks,becausethe Greeks had lost virtue: irritable, cowardly,
unsteady, and all turned to play-actors, they had more than sufficient
reason to submit to having morality preached to them. Not that it
helped them in any way; but great words and attitudes are so becoming
to decadents.4I was the first who, in order to understand the ancient, still rich and
even superabundant Hellenic instinct, took that marvellous phenomenon,
which bears the name of Dionysus, seriously: it can be explained only
as a manifestation of excessive energy. Whoever had studied the Greeks,
as that most profound of modern connoisseurs of their culture, Jakob
Burckhardt of Bâle, had done, knew at once that something had been
achieved by means of this interpretation. And in his “Cultur der
Griechen” Burckhardt inserted a special chapter on the phenomenon
in question. If you would like a glimpse of the other side, you have
only to refer to the almost laughable poverty of instinct among German
philologists when they approach the Dionysian question. The celebrated
Lobeck, especially, who with the venerable assurance of a worm dried up
between books, crawled into this world of mysterious states, succeeded
inconvincing himself that he was scientific, whereas he was simply
revoltingly superficial and childish,—Lobeck, with all the pomp of
profound erudition, gave us to understand that, as a matter of fact,
there was nothing at all in all these curiosities. Truth to tell, the
priests may well have communicated not a few things of value to the
participators in such orgies; for instance, the fact that wine provokes
desire, that man in certain circumstances lives on fruit, that plants
bloom in the spring and fade in the autumn. As regards the astounding
wealth of rites, symbols and myths which take their origin in the orgy,
and with which the world of antiquityis literally smothered, Lobeck
finds that it prompts him to a feat of even greater ingenuity than
the foregoing phenomenon did. “The Greeks,” he says, (Aglaophamus,I. p. 672), “when they had nothing better to do, laughed, sprang and
romped about, or, inasmuch as men also like a change at times, they
would sit down, weep and bewail their lot. Others then came up who tried
to discover some reason for this strange behaviour; and thus, as an
explanation of these habits, there arose an incalculable number of
festivals, legends, and myths. On the other hand it was believed that
thefarcical performanceswhich then perchance began to take place
on festival days, necessarily formed part of the celebrations, and
they were retained as an indispensable part of the ritual.”—This is
contemptible nonsense, and no one will take a man like Lobeck seriously
for a moment We are very differently affected when we examine the
notion “Hellenic,” as Winckelmann and Goethe conceived it, and find it
incompatible with that element out of which Dionysian art springs—I
speak of orgiasm. In reality I do not doubt that Goethe would have
completely excluded any such thing from the potentialities of the Greek
soul.Consequently Goethe did not understand the Greeks.For it is
only in the Dionysian mysteries, in the psychology of the Dionysian
state, that thefundamental factof the Hellenic instinct—its “will
to life”—is expressed. What did the Hellene secure himself with these
mysteries?Eternallife, the eternal recurrence of life; the future
promised and hallowed in the past; the triumphant Yea to life despite
death and change; real life conceived as the collective prolongation
oflife through procreation, through the mysteries of sexuality.
To the Greeks, the symbol of sex was the most venerated of symbols,
the really deep significance of all the piety of antiquity. All the
details of the act of procreation, pregnancy and birth gave rise to
the loftiest and most solemn feelings. In the doctrine of mysteries,painwas pronounced holy: the “pains of childbirth” sanctify pain in
general,—all becoming and all growth, everything that guarantees the
futureinvolvespain.... In order that there may be eternal joy in
creating, in order that the will to life may say Yea to itself in all
eternity, the “pains of childbirth” must also be eternal. All this is
what the word Dionysus signifies: I know of no higher symbolism than
this Greek symbolism, this symbolism of the Dionysian phenomenon. In
it the profoundest instinct of life, the instinct that guarantees the
future of life and life eternal, is understood religiously,—the road
to life itself, procreation, is pronouncedholy,... It was only
Christianity which, with its fundamental resentment against life, made
something impure out of sexuality: it flungfilthat the very basis,
the very first condition of our life.5The psychology of orgiasm conceived as the feeling of a superabundance
of vitality and strength, within the scope of which even painacts
as a stimulus,gave me the key to the concepttragicfeeling,
which has been misunderstood not only by Aristotle, but also even
more by our pessimists. Tragedy is so far from proving anything in
regard to the pessimism ofthe Greeks, as Schopenhauer maintains,
that it ought rather to be considered as the categorical repudiation
andcondemnationthereof. The saying of Yea to life, including
even its most strange and most terrible problems, the will to life
rejoicing over its own inexhaustibleness in thesacrificeof its
highest types—this is what I called Dionysian, this is what I
divined as the bridge leading to the psychology of thetragicpoet.
Not in order to escape from terror and pity, not to purify one’s self
of a dangerous passion by discharging it with vehemence—this is how
Aristotle understood it—but to be far beyond terror and pity and to
be the eternal lust of Becoming itself—that lust which also involves
thelust of destruction.And with this I once more come into touch
with the spot from which I once set out—-the “Birth of Tragedy” was
my first transvaluation of all values: with this I again take my stand
upon the soil from out of which my will and my capacity spring—I, the
last disciple of the philosopher Dionysus,—I, the prophet of eternal
recurrence.THE END.THE HAMMER SPEAKETH“Why so hard!”—said the diamond once unto the charcoal; “are we then
not next of kin?”“Why so soft? O my brethren; this is my question to you. For are ye
not—my brothers?“Why so soft, so servile and yielding? Why are your hearts so fond of
denial and self-denial? How is it that so little fate looketh out from
your eyes?“And if ye will not be men of fate and inexorable, how can ye hope one
day to conquer with me?“And if your hardness will not sparkle, cut and divide, how can ye hope
one day to create with me?“For all creators are hard. And it must seem to you blessed to stamp
your hand upon millenniums as upon wax,——Blessed to write upon the will of millenniums as upon brass,—harder
than brass, nobler than brass.—Hard through and through is only the
noblest.This new table of values, O my brethren, I set over your heads: Become
hard.”—“Thus Spake Zarathustra,”III., 29.THE ANTICHRISTAn Attempted Criticism of ChristianityPREFACEThis book belongs to the very few. Maybe not one of them is yet alive;
unless he be of those who understand my Zarathustra. HowcanI
confound myself with those who to-day already find a hearing?—Only the
day after to-morrow belongs to me. Some are born posthumously.I am only too well aware of the conditions under which a man
understands me, and thennecessarilyunderstands. He must be
intellectually upright to the point of hardness, in order even to
endure my seriousness and my passion. He must be used to living on
mountain-tops,—and to feeling the wretched gabble of politics and
national egotismbeneathhim. He must have become indifferent; he
must never inquire whether truth is profitable or whether it may
prove fatal.... Possessing from strength a predilection for questions
for which no one has enough courage nowadays; the courage for theforbidden;his predestination must be the labyrinth. The experience
of seven solitudes. New ears for new music. New eyes for the most
remote things. A new conscience for truths which hitherto have
remained dumb. And the will to economy on a large scale: to husband
his strength and his enthusiasm.... He must honour himself, he must
love himself; he must be absolutely free with regardto himself....
Very well then! Such men alone are my readers, my proper readers,
my preordained readers: of what account are the rest?—the rest are
simply—humanity.—One must be superior to humanity in power, in
loftiness of soul,—in contempt.FRIEDRICH NIETZSCHE.1Let us look each other in the face. We are hyperboreans,—we know
well enough how far outside the crowd we stand. “Thou wilt find the
way to the Hyperboreans neither by land nor by water”: Pindar already
knew this much about us. Beyond the north, the ice, and death—our
life, our happiness....We discovered happiness; we know the way; we
found the way out of thousands of years of labyrinth. Whoelsewould
have found it?—Not the modern man, surely?—“I do not know where I
am or what I am to do; I am everything that knows not where it is or
what to do,”—sighs the modern man. We were made quite ill bythismodernity,—with its indolent peace, its cowardly compromise, and the
whole of the virtuous filth of its Yea and Nay. This tolerance andlargeur de cœurwhich “forgives” everything because it “understands”
everything, is a Sirocco for us. We prefer to live amid ice than to
be breathed upon by modern virtues and other southerly winds!... We
were brave enough; we spared neither ourselves nor others: but we
were very far from knowing whither to direct our bravery. We were
becoming gloomy; people called us fatalists.Ourfate—it was the
abundance, the tensionand the storing up of power. We thirsted for
thunderbolts and great deeds; we kept at the most respectful distance
from the joy of the weakling, from “resignation.” ... Thunder was in
our air, that part of nature which we are, became overcast—for we had
no direction.The formula of our happiness: a Yea, a Nay, a straight
line, a goal.2What is good? All that enhances the feeling of power, the Will to
Power, and power itself in man. What is bad?—All that proceeds
from weakness. What is happiness?—The feeling that power isincreasing,—that resistance has been overcome.Not contentment, but more power; not peace at any price, but war; not
virtue, but efficiency[1](virtue in the Renaissance sense,virtu,free from all moralic acid). The weak and the botched shall perish:
first principle of our humanity. And they ought even to be helped to
perish.What is more harmful than any vice?—Practical sympathy with all the
botched and the weak—Christianity.3The problem I set in this work is not what will replace mankind in the
order of living being! (—Man is anend—); but, what type of man
must bereared,must bewilled,as having the higher value, as
being the most worthy of life and the surest guarantee of the future.This more valuable type has appeared often enough already: but as a
happy accident, as an exception, never aswilled.He has rather been
precisely the most feared; hitherto he has been almost the terrible in
itself;—and from out the very fear he provoked there arose the will
to rear the type which has how been reared,attained:the domestic
animal, the gregarious animal, the sick animal man,—the Christian.4Mankind doesnotrepresent a development towards a better, stronger
or higher type, in the sense in which this is supposed to occur to-day.
“Progress” is merely a modern idea—that is to say, a false idea.[2]The modern European is still far below the European of the Renaissance
in value. The process of evolution does not by any means imply
elevation, enhancement and increasing strength.On the other hand isolated and individual cases are continually
succeeding in different places on earth, as the outcome of the most
different cultures, and in these ahigher typecertainly manifests
itself: something which by the side of mankind in general, represents a
kind of superman. Such lucky strokes of great success have always been
possible and will perhaps always be possible. And even whole races,
tribes and nations may in certain circumstances represent suchlucky
strokes.5We must not deck out and adorn Christianity: it has waged a deadly
war upon thishighertype of man, it has set a ban upon all the
fundamental instincts of this type, and has distilled evil and the
devil himself out of these instincts:—the strong man as the typical
pariah, the villain. Christianity has sided with everything weak, low,
and botched; it has made an ideal out ofantagonismtowards all the
self-preservative instincts of strong life: it has corrupted even the
reason of the strongest intellects, by teaching that the highest values
of intellectuality are sinful, misleading and full of temptations.
The most lamentable example of this was the corruption of Pascal, who
believed in the perversion of his reason through original sin, whereas
it had only been perverted by his Christianity.6A painful and ghastly spectacle has just risen before my eyes. I tore
down the curtain which concealed mankind’scorruption.This word in
my mouth is at least secure from the suspicion that it contains a moral
charge against mankind. It is—I would fain emphasise this again—free
from moralic acid: to such an extent is this so, that I am most
thoroughly conscious of the corruption in question precisely in those
quarters in which hitherto people have aspired with most determination
to “virtue” and to “godliness.” As you have already surmised, I
understand corruption in the sense ofdecadence.What I maintain is
this, that all the values uponwhich mankind builds its highest hopes
and desires aredecadentvalues.I call an animal, a species, an individual corrupt, when it loses its
instincts, when it selects andprefersthat which is detrimental to
it. A history of the “higher feelings,” of “human ideals”—and it is
not impossible that I shall have to write it—would almost explain why
man is so corrupt. Life itself, to my mind, is nothing more nor less
than the instinct of growth, of permanence, of accumulating forces,
of power: where the will to power is lacking, degeneration sets in.
My contention is that all the highest values of mankindlackthis
will,—that the values of decline and ofnihilismare exercising the
sovereign power under the cover of the holiest names.7Christianity is called the religion ofpity.—Pity is opposed to
the tonic passions which enhance the energy of the feeling of life:
its action is depressing. A man loses power when he pities. By
means of pity the drain on strength which suffering itself already
introduces into the world is multiplied a thousandfold. Through pity,
suffering itself becomes infectious; in certain circumstances it may
lead to a total loss of life and vital energy, which is absurdly
put of proportion to the magnitude of the cause (—the case of the
death of the Nazarene). This is the first standpoint; but there is a
still more important one. Supposing one measures pity according to
the value of the reactions it usually stimulates, its danger to life
appears in a much more telling light On the whole, pity thwarts the
lawof development which is the law of selection. It preserves that
which is ripe for death, it fights in favour of the disinherited and
the condemned of life; thanks to the multitude of abortions of all
kinds which it maintains in life, it lends life itself a sombre and
questionable aspect. People have dared to call pity a virtue (—in
everynobleculture it is considered as a weakness—); people went
still further, they exalted it tothevirtue, the root and origin
of all virtues,—but, of course, what must never be forgotten is the
fact that this was done from the standpoint of a philosophy which
was nihilistic, and on whose shield the deviceThe Denial of Lifewas inscribed. Schopenhauer was right in this respect: by means of
pity, life is denied and mademore worthy of denial,—pity is
thepraxisof Nihilism. I repeat, this depressing and infectious
instinct thwarts those instincts which aim at the preservation and
enhancement of the value life: bymultiplyingmisery quite as much
as by preserving all that is miserable, it is the principal agent in
promoting decadence,—pity exhorts people to nothing, tononentity!But they do not say “nonentity” they say “Beyond,” or “God,” or “the
true life”; or Nirvana, or Salvation, or Blessedness, instead. This
innocent rhetoric, which belongs to the realm of the religio-moral
idiosyncrasy, immediately appears to bevery much less innocentif
one realises what the tendency is which here tries to drape itself in
the mantle of sublime expressions—the tendency of hostility to life.
Schopenhauer was hostile to life: that is why he elevated pity to a
virtue.... Aristotle, as you know, recognised in pity a morbid and
dangerousstate, of which it was wise to rid one’s self from time to
time by a purgative: he regarded tragedy as a purgative. For the sake
of the instinct of life, it would certainly seem necessary to find some
means of lancing any such morbid and dangerous accumulation of pity, as
that which possessed Schopenhauer (and unfortunately the whole of our
literary and artistic decadence as well, from St Petersburg to Paris,
from Tolstoi to Wagner), if only to make itburst....Nothing is
more unhealthy in the midst of our unhealthy modernity, than Christian
pity. To be doctorshere,to be inexorablehere,to wield the knife
effectivelyhere,—all this is our business, all this isourkind of love to our fellows, this is what makesusphilosophers, us
hyperboreans!—8It is necessary to state whom we regard as our antithesis:—the
theologians, and all those who have the blood of theologians in their
veins—the whole of our philosophy.... A man must have had his very
nose upon this fatality, or better still he must have experienced it
in his own soul; he must almost have perished through it, in order
to be unable to treat this matter lightly (—the free-spiritedness
of our friends the naturalists and physiologists is, in my opinion,
ajoke,—what they lack in these questions is passion, what they
lack is having suffered from these questions—). This poisoning
extends much further than people think: I unearthed the “arrogant”
instinct of the theologian, wherever nowadays people feel themselves
idealists,—wherever, thanks to superior antecedents, they claim the
right to rise above reality and to regard it with suspicion.... Like
the priest the idealist has every grandiloquent concept in his hand
(—and not only in his hand!), he wields them all with kindly contempt
against the “understanding,” the “senses,” “honours,” “decent living,”
“science”; he regards such things asbeneathhim, as detrimental and
seductive forces, upon the face of which, “the Spirit” moves in pure
absoluteness:—as if humility, chastity, poverty, in a wordholiness,had not done incalculably more harm to life hitherto, than any sort of
horror and vice.... Pure spirit is pure falsehood.... As long as the
priest, theprofessionaldenier, calumniator and poisoner of life, is
considered as thehighestkind of man, there can be no answer to the
question, whatistruth? Truth has already been turned topsy-turvy,
when the conscious advocate of nonentity and of denial passes as the
representative of “truth.”9It is upon this theological instinct that I wage war. I find traces
of it everywhere. Whoever has the blood of theologians in his veins,
stands from the start in a false and dishonest position to all things.
The pathos which grows out of this state, is calledFaith:that is
to say, to shut one’s eyes once and for all, in order not to suffer
at the sight of incurable falsity. People convert this faulty view of
all things into a moral, a virtue, a thing of holiness. They endow
their distorted vision with a good conscience,—they claim that nootherpoint ofview is any longer of value, once theirs has been
made sacrosanct with the names “God,” “Salvation,” “Eternity.” I
unearthed the instinct of the theologian everywhere: it is the most
universal, and actually the most subterranean form of falsity on earth.
That which a theologian considers true,mustof necessity be false:
this furnishes almost the criterion of truth. It is his most profound
self-preservative instinct which forbids reality ever to attain to
honour in any way, or even to raise its voice. Whithersoever the
influence of the theologian extends,valuationsare topsy-turvy,
and the concepts “true” and “false” have necessarily changed places:
that which is most deleterious to life, is here called “true,” that
which enhances it, elevates it, says Yea to it, justifies it and
renders it triumphant, is called “false.” ... If it should happen that
theologians,viathe “conscience” either of princes or of the people,
stretch out their hand for power, let us not be in any doubt as to
what results therefrom each time, namely:—the will to the end, thenihilisticwill to power....10Among Germans I am immediately understood when I say, that philosophy
is ruined by the blood of theologians. The Protestant minister is
the grand-father of German philosophy, Protestantism itself is the
latter’speccatum originale.Definition of Protestantism: the
partial paralysis of Christianity—and of reason.... One needs only to
pronounce the words “Tübingen Seminary,” in order to understand what
German philosophy really is at bottom,theologyin disguise.... The
Swabians are the best liars in Germany, they lie innocently.... Whence
came all the rejoicing with which the appearance of Kant was greeted
by the scholastic world of Germany, three-quarters of which consist of
clergymen’s and schoolmasters’ sons? Whence came the German conviction,
which finds an echo even now, that Kant inaugurated a change for thebetter?The theologian’s instinct in the German scholar divined what
had once again been made possible.... A back-staircase leading into
the old ideal was discovered, the concept “true world,” the concept
morality as theessenceof the world (—those two most vicious errors
that have ever existed!), were, thanks to a subtle and wily scepticism,
once again, if not demonstrable, at least no longerrefutable....Reason, theprerogativeof reason, does not extend so far.... Out of
reality they had made “appearance”; and an absolutely false world—that
of being—had been declared to be reality. Kant’s success is merely a
theologian’s success. Like Luther, and like Leibniz, Kant was one brake
the more upon the already squeaky wheel of German uprightness.11One word more against Kant as amoralist.A virtuemustbeourinvention, our most personal defence and need: in every other sense it
is merely a danger. That which does not constitute a condition of our
life, is merely harmful to it: to possess a virtue merely because one
happens to respect the concept “virtue,” as Kant would have us do, is
pernicious. “Virtue,” “Duty,” “Goodness in itself,”goodness stamped
with the character of impersonality and universal validity—these
things are mere mental hallucinations, in which decline the final
devitalisation of life and Königsbergian Chinadom find expression. The
most fundamental laws of preservation and growth, demand precisely the
reverse, namely:—that each should discoverhisown virtue, his own
Categorical Imperative. A nation goes to the dogs when it confounds
its concept of duty with the general concept of duty. Nothing is more
profoundly, more thoroughly pernicious, than every impersonal feeling
of duty, than every sacrifice to the Moloch of abstraction.—Fancy no
one’s having thought Kant’s Categorical Imperativedangerous to life!... The instinct of the theologist alone took it under its wing!—An
action stimulated by the instinct of life, is proved to be a proper
action by the happiness that accompanies it: and that nihilist with the
bowels of a Christian dogmatist regarded happiness as anobjection
.... What is there that destroys a man more speedily than to work,
think, feel, as an automaton of “duty,” without internal promptings,
without a profound personal predilection, without joy? This is the
recipepar excellenceof decadence and even of idiocy.... Kant became
an idiot—And he was the contemporary of Goethe! This fatal spider was
regarded astheGerman philosopher,—is still regarded as such!... I
refrain from saying what I think of the Germans.... Did Kant not see in
the French Revolution the transition of the State from the inorganic to
theorganicform? Did he not ask himself whether there was a single
event on record which could be explainedotherwise than as a moral
faculty of mankind; so that by means of it, “mankind’s tendency towards
good,” might beprovedonce and for all? Kant’s reply: “that is the
Revolution.” Instinct at fault in anything and everything, hostility to
nature as an instinct, German decadence made into philosophy—that is
Kant!12Except for a few sceptics, the respectable type in the history of
philosophy, the rest do not know the very first pre-requisite of
intellectual uprightness. They all behave like females, do these great
enthusiasts and animal prodigies,—they regard “beautiful feelings”
themselves as arguments, the “heaving breast” as the bellows of
divinity, and conviction as thecriterionof truth. In the end,
even Kant, with “Teutonic” innocence, tried to dress this lack of
intellectual conscience up in a scientific garb by means of the concept
“practical reason.” He deliberately invented a kind of reason which
at times would allow one to dispense with reason, that is to say when
“morality,” when the sublime command “thou shalt,” makes itself heard.
When one remembers that in almost all nations the philosopher is only a
further development of the priestly type, this heirloom of priesthood,
thisfraud towards one’s self,no longer surprises one. When a man
has a holy life-task, as for instance to improve, save, or deliver
mankind, when a man bears God in his breast, and is the mouthpiece of
imperatives from another world,—with such a mission he stands beyond
the pale of all merely reasonable valuations. He is even sanctified by
such a taste,and is already the type of a higher order! What does a
priest care about science! He stands too high for that!—And until now
the priest hasruled!—He it was who determined the concept “true
and false.”13Do not let us undervalue the fact that weourselves,we free spirits,
are already a “transvaluation of all values,” an incarnate declaration
of war against all the old concepts “true” and “untrue” and of a
triumph over them. The most valuable standpoints are always the last
to be found: but the most valuable standpoints are the methods. AH the
methods and the first principles of our modern scientific procedure,
had for years to encounter the profoundest contempt: association
with them meant exclusion from the society of decent people—one was
regarded as an “enemy of God,” as a scoffer at truth and as “one
possessed.” With one’s scientific nature, one belonged to the Chandala.
We have had the whole feeling of mankind against us; hitherto their
notion of that which ought to be truth, of that which ought to serve
the purpose of truth: every “thou shalt,” has been directed against
us.... Our objects, our practices, our calm, cautious distrustful
manner—everything about us seemed to them absolutely despicable and
beneath contempt After all, it might be asked with some justice,
whether the thing which kept mankind blindfold so long, were not an
æsthetic taste: what they demanded of truth was apicturesqueeffect,
and from the man of science what they expected was that he should make
a forcible appeal to theirsenses. It was ourmodestywhich ran
counter to their taste so long ... And oh! how well they guessed this,
did these divine turkey-cocks!—14We have altered our standpoint. In every respect we have become
more modest We no longer derive man from the “spirit,” and from the
“godhead”; we have thrust him back among the beasts. We regard him as
the strongest animal, because he is the craftiest: one of the results
thereof is his intellectuality. On the other hand we guard against the
vain pretension, which even here would fain assert itself: that man is
the greatarrière penséeof organic evolution! He is by no means the
crown of creation, beside him, every other creature stands at the same
stage of perfection.... And even in asserting this we go a little too
far; for, relatively speaking, man is the most botched and diseased
of animals, and he has wandered furthest from his instincts. Be all
this as it may, he is certainly the mostinteresting!As regards
animals, Descartes was the first, with really admirable daring, to
venture the thought that the beast wasmachina,and the whole of
our physiology is endeavouring to prove this proposition. Moreover,
logically we do not set man apart, as Descartes did: the extent
to which man is understood to-day goes only so far as he has been
understood mechanistically. Formerly man was given “free will,” as his
dowry from a higher sphere; nowadays we have robbed him even of will,
in view of the fact that no such faculty is any longer known. The only
purpose served by the old word“will,” is to designate a result, a
sort of individual reaction which necessarily follows upon a host of
partly discordant and partly harmonious stimuli:—the will no longer
“effects” or “moves” anything.... Formerly people thought that man’s
consciousness, his “spirit,” was a proof of his lofty origin, of his
divinity. With the idea of perfecting man, he was conjured to draw his
senses inside himself, after the manner of the tortoise, to cut off all
relations with terrestrial things, and to divest himself of his mortal
shell. Then the most important thing about him, the “pure spirit,”
would remain over. Even concerning these things we have improved our
standpoint Consciousness, “spirit,” now seems to us rather a symptom of
relative imperfection in the organism, as an experiment, a groping, a
misapprehension, an affliction which absorbs an unnecessary quantity of
nervous energy. We deny that anything can be done perfectly so long as
it is done consciously. “Pure spirit” is a piece of “pure stupidity”:
if we discount the nervous system, the senses and the “mortal shell,”
we have miscalculated—that it is all!...15In Christianity neither morality nor religion comes in touch at all
with reality. Nothing but imaginarycauses(God, the soul, the ego,
spirit, free will—or even non-free will); nothing but imaginaryeffects(sin, salvation, grace, punishment, forgiveness of sins).
Imaginary beings are supposed to have intercourse (God, spirits,
souls); imaginary Natural History (anthropocentric: total lack of
the notion “natural causes”); an imaginarypsychology(nothingbut misunderstandings of self, interpretations of pleasant or
unpleasant general feelings; for instance of the states of thenervus
sympathicus,with the help of the sign language of a religio-moral
idiosyncrasy,—repentance, pangs of conscience, the temptation of
the devil, the presence of God); an imaginary teleology (the Kingdom
of God, the Last Judgment, Everlasting Life).—This purely fictitious
world distinguishes itself very unfavourably from the world of
dreams: the latterreflectsreality, whereas the former falsifies,
depreciates and denies it Once the concept “nature” was taken to mean
the opposite of the concept God, the word “natural” had to acquire the
meaning of abominable,—the whole of that fictitious world takes its
root in the hatred of nature (—reality!—), it is the expression of
profound discomfiture in the presence of reality....But this explains
everything.What is the only kind of man who has reasons for wriggling
out of reality by lies? The man who suffers from reality. But in
order to suffer from reality one must be a bungled portion of it. The
preponderance of pain over pleasure is thecauseof that fictitious
morality and religion: but any such preponderance furnishes the formula
for decadence.16A criticism of the Christian concept of God inevitably leads to the
same conclusion.—A nation that still believes in itself, also has
its own God. In him it honours the conditions which enable it to
remain uppermost,—that is to say, its virtues. It projects its joy
over itself, its feeling of power, into a being, towhom it can be
thankful for such things. He who is rich, will give of his riches: a
proud people requires a God, unto whom it cansacrificethings....
Religion, when restricted to these principles, is a form of gratitude.
A man is grateful for his own existence; for this he must have a
God.—Such a God must be able to benefit and to injure him, he must be
able to act the friend and the foe. He must be esteemed for his good
as well as for his evil qualities. The monstrous castration of a God
by making him a God only of goodness, would lie beyond the pale of the
desires of such a community. The evil God is just as urgently needed
as the good God: for a people in such a form of society certainly does
not owe its existence to toleration and humaneness.... What would be
the good of a God who knew nothing of anger, revenge, envy, scorn,
craft, and violence?—who had perhaps never experienced the rapturousardeursof victory and of annihilation? No one would understand such
a God: why should one possess him?—Of course, when a people is on
the road to ruin; when it feels its belief in a future, its hope of
freedom vanishing for ever; when it becomes conscious of submission
as the most useful quality, and of the virtues of the submissive as
self-preservative measures, then its God must also modify himself.
He then becomes a tremulous and unassuming sneak; he counsels “peace
of the soul,” the cessation of all hatred, leniency and “love” even
towards friend and foe. He is for ever moralising, he crawls into
the heart of every private virtue, becomes a God for everybody, he
retires from active service and becomes a Cosmopolitan.... Formerly
herepresented a people, the strength of a people, everything
aggressive and desirous of power lying concealed in the heart of a
nation: now he is merely the good God.... In very truth Gods have no
other alternative, they areeitherthe Will to Power—in which case
they are always the Gods of whole nations,—or, on the other hand, the
incapacity for power—in which case they necessarily become good.17Wherever the Will to Power, no matter in what form, begins to decline,
a physiological retrogression, decadence, always supervenes. The
godhead ofdecadence,shorn of its masculine virtues and passions
is perforce converted into the God of the physiologically degraded,
of the weak. Of course they do not call themselves the weak, they
call themselves “the good.” ... No hint will be necessary to help you
to understand at what moment in history the dualistic fiction of a
good and an evil God first became possible. With the same instinct by
which the subjugated reduce their God to “Goodness in itself,” they
also cancel the good qualities from their conqueror’s God; they avenge
themselves on their masters by diabolising the latter’s God.—Thegood
Godand the devil as well:—both the abortions of decadence.—How
is it possible that we are still so indulgent towards the simplicity
of Christian theologians to-day, as to declare with them that the
evolution of the concept God, from the “God of Israel,” the God of
a people, to the Christian God, the quintessence of all goodness,
marks astep forward?—But even Renan does this. As if Renanhad
a right to simplicity! Why the very contrary stares one in the face.
When the pre-requisites ofascendinglife, when everything strong,
plucky, masterful and proud has been eliminated from the concept
of God, and step by step he has sunk down to the symbol of a staff
for the weary, of a last straw for all those who are drowning; when
he becomes the pauper’s God, the sinner’s God, the sick man’s Godpar excellence,and the attribute “Saviour,” “Redeemer,” remainsoveras the one essential attribute of divinity: what does such a
metamorphosis, such an abasement of the godhead imply?—Undoubtedly,
“the kingdom of God” has thus become larger. Formerly all he had was
his people, his “chosen” people. Since then he has gone travelling
over foreign lands, just as his people have done; since then he has
never rested anywhere: until one day he felt at home everywhere, the
Great Cosmopolitan,—until he got the “greatest number,” and half the
world on his side. But the God of the “greatest number,” the democrat
among gods, did not become a proud heathen god notwithstanding: he
remained a Jew, he remained the God of the back streets, the God of
all dark corners and hovels, of all the unwholesome quarters of the
world!... His universal empire is now as ever a netherworld empire,
an infirmary, a subterranean empire, a ghetto-empire.... And he
himself is so pale, so weak, so decadent ... Even the palest of the
pale were able to master him—our friends the metaphysicians, those
albinos of thought. They spun their webs around him so long that
ultimately he was hypnotised by their movements and himselfbecame a
spider, a metaphysician. Thenceforward he once more began spinning the
world out of his inner being—sub specie Spinozæ,—thenceforward
he transfigured himself into something ever thinner and ever more
anæmic, became “ideal,” became “pure spirit,” became“absotutum”and
“thing-in-itself.” ...The decline and fall of a god:God became the
“thing-in-itself.”18The Christian concept of God—God as the deity of the sick, God as a
spider, God as spirit—is one of the most corrupt concepts of God that
has ever been attained on earth. Maybe it represents the low-water
mark in the evolutionary ebb of the godlike type God degenerated into
thecontradiction of life,instead of being its transfiguration and
eternal Yea! With God war is declared on life, nature, and the will to
life! God is the formula for every calumny of this world and for every
lie concerning a beyond! In God, nonentity is deified, and the will to
nonentity is declared holy!19The fact that the strong races of Northern Europe did not repudiate
the Christian God, certainly does not do any credit to their religious
power, not to speak of their taste They ought to have been able
successfully to cope with such a morbid and decrepit offshoot of
decadence. And a curse lies on their heads; because they were unable to
cope with him: they made illness, decrepitude and contradiction a part
of all their instincts,—since then they have notcreatedany other
God! Two thousand years have passed and not a single new God! But still
there exists, and as if by right,—like anultimumandmaximumof
god-creating power,—thecreator spiritusin man, this miserable God
of Christian monotono-theism! This hybrid creature of decay, nonentity,
concept and contradiction, in which all the instincts of decadence, all
the cowardices and languors of the soul find their sanction!——20With my condemnation of Christianity I should not like to have done
an injustice to a religion which is related to it and the number of
whose followers is even greater; I refer to Buddhism. As nihilistic
religions, they are akin,—they are religions of decadence,—while
each is separated from the other in the most extraordinary fashion.
For being able to compare them at all, the critic of Christianity is
profoundly grateful to Indian scholars.—Buddhism is a hundred times
more realistic than Christianity,—it is part of its constitutional
heritage to be able to face problems objectively and coolly, it is
the outcome of centuries of lasting philosophical activity. The
concept “God” was already exploded when it appeared. Buddhism is
the only reallypositivereligion to be found in history, even
in its epistemology (which is strict phenomenalism)—it no longer
speaks of the “struggle withsin” but fully recognising the true
nature of reality it speaks of the “struggle withpain.” It already
has—and this distinguishes it fundamentally from Christianity,—the
self-deception of moral concepts beneath it,—touse my own
phraseology, it standsBeyond Good and Evil.The two physiological
facts upon which it rests and upon which it bestows its attention
are: in the first place excessive irritability of feeling, which
manifests itself as a refined susceptibility to pain,and alsoas
super-spiritualisation, an all-too-lengthy sojourn amid concepts and
logical procedures, under the influence of which the personal instinct
has suffered in favour of the “impersonal.” (—Both of these states
will be known to a few of my readers, the objective ones, who, like
myself, will know them from experience.) Thanks to these physiological
conditions, a state of depression set in, which Buddha sought to combat
by means of hygiene. Against it, he prescribes life in the open, a life
of travel; moderation and careful choice in food; caution in regard to
all intoxicating liquor, as also in regard to all the passions which
tend to create bile and to heat the blood; and he deprecates care
either on one’s own or on other people’s account He recommends ideas
that bring one either peace or good cheer,—he invents means whereby
the habit of contrary ideas may be lost He understands goodness—being
good—as promoting health.Prayeris out of the question, as is
alsoasceticism;there is neither a Categorical Imperative nor any
discipline whatsoever, even within the walls of a monastery (—it is
always possible to leave it if one wants to). All these things would
have been only a means of accentuating the excessive irritability
already referred to. Precisely on this account he does not exhort his
followers to wage war upon those who do not share their views; nothing
is more abhorredin his doctrine than the feeling of revenge, of
aversion, and of resentment (—“not through hostility doth hostility
end”: the touching refrain of the whole of Buddhism....) And in this
he was right; for it is precisely these passions which are thoroughly
unhealthy in view of the principal dietetic object The mental fatigue
which he finds already existent and which expresses itself in
excessive “objectivity” (i.e., the enfeeblement of the individual’s
interest—loss of ballast and of “egoism”), he combats by leading
the spiritual interests as well imperatively back to the individual
In Buddha’s doctrine egoism is a duty: the thing which is above all
necessary,i.e.,“how canst thou be rid of suffering” regulates
and defines the whole of the spiritual diet (—let anyone but think
of that Athenian who also declared war upon pure “scientificality,”
Socrates, who made a morality out of personal egoism even in the realm
of problems).21The pre-requisites for Buddhism are a very mild climate, great
gentleness and liberality in the customs of a people andnomilitarism. The movement must also originate among the higher and
even learned classes. Cheerfulness, peace and absence of desire, are
the highest of inspirations, and they arerealised.Buddhism is not
a religion in which perfection is merely aspired to: perfection is
the normal case. In Christianity all the instincts of the subjugated
and oppressed come to the fore: it is the lowest classes who seek
their salvation in this religion. Here the pastime, the manner ofkilling time is to practise the casuistry of sin, self-criticism, and
conscience inquisition. Here the ecstasy in the presence of apowerful
being,called “god,” is constantly maintained by means of prayer;
while the highest thing is regarded as unattainable, as a gift, as an
act of “grace” Here plain dealing is also entirely lacking: concealment
and the darkened room are Christian. Here the body is despised, hygiene
is repudiated as sensual; the church repudiates even cleanliness (—the
first Christian measure after the banishment of the Moors was the
closing of the public baths, of which Cordova alone possessed 270).
A certain spirit of cruelty towards one’s self and others is also
Christian: hatred of all those who do not share one’s views; the will
to persecute Sombre and exciting ideas are in the foreground; the most
coveted states and those which are endowed with the finest names, are
really epileptic in their nature; diet is selected in such a way as
to favour morbid symptoms and to over-excite the nerves. Christian,
too, is the mortal hatred of the earth’s rulers,—the “noble,”—and
at the same time a sort of concealed and secret competition with them
(the subjugated leave the “body” to their master—all they want is
the “soul”). Christian is the hatred of the intellect, of pride, of
courage, freedom, intellectuallibertinage;Christian is the hatred
of thesenses,of the joys of the senses, of joy in general.22When Christianity departed from its native soil, which consisted of the
lowest classes, thesubmergedmassesof the ancient world, and set
forth in quest of power among barbaric nations, it no longer met with
exhausted men but inwardly savage and self-lacerating men—the strong
but bungled men. Here, dissatisfaction with one’s self, suffering
through one’s self, is not as in the case of Buddhism, excessive
irritability and susceptibility to pain, but rather, conversely, it
is an inordinate desire for inflicting pain, for a discharge of the
inner tension in hostile deeds and ideas. Christianity was in need ofbarbaricideas and values, in order to be able to master barbarians:
such are for instance, the sacrifice of the first-born, the drinking
of blood at communion, the contempt of the intellect and of culture;
torture in all its forms, sensual and non-sensual; the great pomp of
the cult Buddhism is a religion forsenilemen, for races which
have become kind, gentle, and over-spiritual, and which feel pain too
easily (—Europe is not nearly ripe for it yet—); it calls them back
to peace and cheerfulness, to a regimen for the intellect, to a certain
hardening of the body. Christianity aims at masteringbeasts of prey;
its expedient is to make themill,—to render feeble is the Christian
recipe for taming, for “civilisation.” Buddhism is a religion for the
close and exhaustion of civilisation; Christianity does not even find
civilisation at hand when it appears, in certain circumstances it lays
the foundation of civilisation.23Buddhism, I repeat, is a hundred times colder, more truthful,
more objective. It no longer requiresto justify pain and its
susceptibility to suffering by the interpretation of sin,—it simply
says what it thinks, “I suffer.” To the barbarian, on the other hand,
suffering in itself is not a respectable thing: in order to acknowledge
to himself that he suffers, what he requires, in the first place, is
an explanation (his instinct directs him more readily to deny his
suffering, or to endure it in silence). In his case, the word “devil”
was a blessing: man had an almighty and terrible enemy,—he had no
reason to be ashamed of suffering at the hands of such an enemy.—At bottom there are in Christianity one or two subtleties which belong
to the Orient In the first place it knows that it is a matter of
indifference whether a thing be true or not; but that it is of the
highest importance that it should be believed to be true. Truth and
the belief that something is true: two totally separate worlds of
interest, almostopposite worlds,the road to the one and the road to
the other lie absolutely apart To be initiated into this fact almost
constitutes one a sage in the Orient: the Brahmins understood it thus,
so did Plato, and so does every disciple of esoteric wisdom. If for
example it give anyone pleasure to believe himself delivered from sin,
it isnota necessary prerequisite thereto that he should be sinful,
but only that he shouldfeelsinful. If, however,faithis above
all necessary, then reason, knowledge, and scientific research must be
brought into evil repute: the road to truth becomes theforbiddenroad.—Stronghopeis a much greater stimulant of life than any
single realised joy could be. Sufferers must be sustainedby a hope
which no actuality can contradict,—and which cannot ever be realised:
the hope of another world. (Precisely on account of this power that
hope has of making the unhappy linger on, the Greeks regarded it as
the evil of evils, as the mostmischievousevil: it remained behind
in Pandora’s box.) In order thatlovemay be possible, God must be a
person. In order that the lowest instincts may also make their voices
heard God must be young. For the ardour of the women a beautiful saint,
and for the ardour of the men a Virgin Mary has to be pressed into the
foreground. All this on condition that Christianity wishes to rule
over a certain soil, on which Aphrodisiac or Adonis cults had already
determined thenotionof a cult. To insist uponchastityonly
intensifies the vehemence and profundity of the religious instinct—it
makes the cult warmer, more enthusiastic, more soulful.—Love is the
state in which man sees things most widely different from what they
are. The force of illusion reaches its zenith here, as likewise the
sweetening and transfiguring power. When a man is in love he endures
more than at other times; he submits to everything. The thing was to
discover a religion in which it was possible to love: by this means
the worst in life is overcome—it is no longer even seen.—So much
for three Christian virtues Faith, Hope, and Charity: I call them the
three Christianprecautionary measures.—Buddhism is too full of aged
wisdom, too positivistic to be shrewd in this way.