24Here I only touch upon the problem of the originof Christianity.
The first principle of its solution reads: Christianity can be
understood only in relation to the soil out of which it grew,—it is
not a counter-movement against the Jewish instinct, it is the rational
outcome of the latter, one step further in its appalling logic. In
the formula of the Saviour: “for Salvation is of the Jews.”—The
second principle is: the psychological type of the Galilean is still
recognisable, but it was only in a state of utter degeneration (which
is at once a distortion and an overloading with foreign features) that
he was able to serve the purpose for which he has been used,—namely,
as the type of a Redeemer of mankind.The Jews are the most remarkable people in the history of the world,
because when they were confronted with the question of Being or
non-Being, with simply uncanny deliberateness, they preferred Beingat any price:this price was the fundamentalfalsificationof all
Nature, all the naturalness and all the reality, of the inner quite
as much as of the outer world. They hedged themselves in behind all
those conditions under which hitherto a people has been able to live,
has been allowed to live; of themselves they created an idea which was
the reverse ofnaturalconditions,—each in turn, they twisted first
religion, then the cult, then morality, history and psychology, about
in a manner so perfectly hopeless that they were madeto contradict
their natural value.We meet with the same phenomena again, and
exaggerated to an incalculable degree, although only as a copy:—the
Christian Church as compared with the “chosen people,” lacks all
claim to originality. Precisely on this account the Jews are the mostfatalpeople in the history of the world: their ultimate influence
has falsified mankind to such an extent, that even to this day the
Christian can be anti-Semitic in spirit, without comprehending that he
himself is thefinal consequence of Judaism.It was in my “Genealogy of Morals” that I first gave a
psychological exposition of the idea of the antithesis noble andresentment-morality,the latter having arisen out of an attitude
of negation to the former: but this is Judæo-Christian morality
heart and soul. In order to be able to say Nay to everything that
represents the ascending movement of life, prosperity, power,
beauty, and self-affirmation on earth, the instinct of resentment,
become genius, bad to inventanotherworld, from the standpoint
of which thatYea-sayingto life appeared asthemost evil and
most abominable thing. From the psychological standpoint the Jewish
people are possessed of the toughest vitality. Transplanted amid
impossible conditions, with profound self-preservative intelligence,
it voluntarily took the side of all the instincts of decadence,—notas though dominated by them, but because it detected a power in them
by means of which it could assert itselfagainst“the world.” The
Jews are the opposite of alldecadents: they have been forced to
represent them to the point of illusion, and with anon plus ultraof
histrionic genius, they have known how to set themselves at the head
of all decadent movements (St Paul and Christianity for instance), in
order to create something from them which is stronger than every partysaying Yea to life.For the category of men which aspires to power in
Judaism and Christianity,—that is to say, for the sacerdotal class,
decadence is but ameans;this category of men has a vital interest
in making men sick, and in turning the notions “good” and “bad,” “true”
and “false,” upside down in a manner which is not only dangerous to
life, but also slanders it.25The history of Israel is invaluable as the typical history of everydenaturalizationof natural values: let me point to five facts
which relate thereto. Originally, and above all in the period of
the kings, even Israel’s attitude to all things was therightone
—that is to say, the natural one. Its Jehovah was the expression of
its consciousness of power, of its joy over itself, of its hope for
itself: victory and salvation were expected from him, through him it
was confident that Nature would give what a people requires—above
all rain. Jehovah is the God of Israel, andconsequentlythe God
of justice: this is the reasoning of every people which is in the
position of power, and which has a good conscience in that position. In
the solemn cult both sides of this self-affirmation of a people find
expression: it is grateful for the great strokes of fate by means of
which it became uppermost; it is grateful for the regularity in the
succession of the seasons and for all good fortune in the rearing of
cattle and in the tilling of the soil.—This state of affairs remained
the ideal for some considerable time, even after it had been swept away
in a deplorable manner by anarchy from within and the Assyrians from
without But the people still retained, as their highest desideratum,
that visionof a king who was a good soldier and a severe judge;
and he who retained it most of all was that typical prophet (—that
is to say, critic and satirist of the age), Isaiah.—But all hopes
remained unrealised. The old God was no longer able to do what he had
done formerly. He ought to have been dropped. What happened? The idea
of him was changed,—the idea of him was denaturalised: this was the
price they paid for retaining him.—Jehovah, the God of “Justice,”—is
no longer one with Israel, no longer the expression of a people’s
sense of dignity: he is only a god on certain conditions.... The
idea of him becomes a weapon in the hands of priestly agitators who
henceforth interpret all happiness as a reward, all unhappiness as a
punishment for disobedience to God, for “sin”: that most fraudulent
method of interpretation which arrives at a so-called “moral order
of the Universe,” by means of which the concept “cause” and “effect”
is turned upside down. Once natural causation has been swept out of
the world by reward and punishment, a causationhostile to naturebecomes necessary; whereupon all the forms of unnaturalness follow.
A God whodemands,—in the place of a God who helps, who advises,
who is at bottom only a name for every happy inspiration of courage
and of self-reliance.... Morality is no longer the expression of the
conditions of life and growth, no longer the most fundamental instinct
of life, but it has become abstract, it has become the opposite of
life,—Morality as the fundamental perversion of the imagination,
as the “evil eye” for all things. What is Jewish morality, what is
Christian morality? Chance robbed of its innocence; unhappinesspolluted with the idea of “sin”; well-being interpreted as a danger, as
a “temptation”; physiological indisposition poisoned by means of the
canker-worm of conscience....26The concept of God falsified; the concept of morality falsified: but
the Jewish priesthood did not stop at this. No use could be made of
the wholehistoryof Israel, therefore it must go! These priests
accomplished that miracle of falsification, of which the greater part
of the Bible is the document: with unparalleled contempt and in the
teeth of all tradition and historical facts, they interpreted their own
people’s past in a religious manner,—that is to say, they converted
it into a ridiculous mechanical process of salvation, on the principle
that all sin against Jehovah led to punishment, and that all pious
worship of Jehovah led to reward. We would feel this shameful act of
historical falsification far more poignantly if the ecclesiastical
interpretation of history through millenniums had not blunted almost
all our sense for the demands of uprightnessin historicis.And
the church is seconded by the philosophers:theof “a moral order
of the universe” permeates the whole development even of more modern
philosophy. What does a “moral order of the universe” mean? That once
and for all there is such a thing as a will of God which determines
what man has to do and what he has to leave undone; that the value
of a people or of an individual is measured according to how much or
how little the one or the other obeys the will of God; that in the
destiniesof a people or of an individual, the will of God shows
itself dominant, that is to say it punishes or rewards according to
the degree of obedience. In the place of this miserable falsehood,realitysays: a parasitical type of man, who can flourish only at the
cost of all the healthy elements of life, the priest abuses the name
of God: he calls that state of affairs in which the priest determines
the value of things “the Kingdom of God”; he calls the means whereby
such a state of affairs is attained or maintained, “the Will of God”;
with cold-blooded cynicism he measures peoples, ages and individuals
according to whether they favour or oppose the ascendancy of the
priesthood. Watch him at work: in the hands of the Jewish priesthood
the Augustan Age in the history of Israel became an age of decline;
the exile, the protracted misfortune transformed itself into eternalpunishmentfor the Augustan Age—that age in which the priest did not
yet exist Out of the mighty and thoroughly free-born figures of the
history of Israel, they made, according to their requirements, either
wretched bigots and hypocrites, or “godless ones”: they simplified
the psychology of every great event to the idiotic formula “obedient
or disobedient to God.”—A step further: the “Will of God,” that is
to say the self-preservative measures of the priesthood, must be
known—to this end a “revelation” is necessary. In plain English: a
stupendous literary fraud becomes necessary, “holy scriptures” are
discovered,—and they are published abroad with all hieratic pomp,
with days of penance and lamentations over the long state Of “sin.”
The “Will ofGod” has long stood firm: the whole of the trouble
lies in the fact that the “Holy Scriptures” have been discarded....
Moses was already the “Will of God” revealed.... What had happened?
With severity and pedantry, the priest had formulated once and for
all—even to the largest and smallest contributions that were to be
paid to him (—not forgetting the daintiest portions of meat; for the
priest is a consumer of beef-steaks)—what he wanted,“what the Will
of God was.” ... Hence-forward everything became so arranged that the
priests wereindispensable everywhere.At all the natural events of
life, at birth, at marriage, at the sick-bed, at death,—not to speak
of the sacrifice (“the meal”),—the holy parasite appears in order
to denaturalise, or in his language, to “sanctify,” everything....
For this should be understood: every natural custom, every natural
institution (the State, the administration of justice, marriage, the
care of the sick and the poor), every demand inspired by the instinct
of life, in short everything that has a value in itself, is rendered
absolutely worthless and even dangerous through the parasitism of the
priest (or of the “moral order of the universe”): a sanction after
the fact is required,—apower which imparts valueis necessary,
which in so doing says, Nay to nature, and which by this means alonecreatesa valuation.... The priest depreciates and desecrates nature:
it is only at this price that he exists at all.—Disobedience to God,
that is to say, to the priest, to the “law,” now receives the name of
“sin”; the means of “reconciling one’s self with God” are of course
of a nature whichrender subordination to the priesthood all the
more fundamental: the priest alone is able to “save.” ... From the
psychological standpoint, in every society organised upon a hieratic
basis, “sins” are indispensable: they are the actual weapons of power,
the priestlivesupon sins, it is necessary for him that people
should “sin.” ... Supreme axiom: “God forgiveth him that repenteth”—in
plain English:him that submitteth himself to the priest.27Christianity grew out of an utterlyfalsesoil, in which all nature,
every natural value, everyrealityhad the deepest instincts of the
ruling class against it; it was a form of deadly hostility to reality
which has never been surpassed. The “holy people” which had retained
only priestly values and priestly names for all things, and which, with
a logical consistency that is terrifying, had divorced itself from
everything still powerful on earth as if it were “unholy,” “worldly,”
“sinful,”—this people created a final formula for its instinct which
was consistent to the point of self-suppression; asChristianityit
denied even the last form of reality, the “holy people,” the “chosen
people,”Jewishreality itself. The case is of supreme interest:
the small insurrectionary movement christened with the name of Jesus
of Nazareth, is the Jewish instinctover again,—in other words,
it is the sacerdotal instinct which can no longer endure the priest
as a fact; it is the discovery of a kind of life even more fantastic
than the one previously conceived, a vision of life which is even
more unreal than that which the organisationof a church stipulates.
Christianity denies the church.[3]I fail to see against whom was directed the insurrection of which
rightly orwronglyJesus is understood to have been the promoter,
if it were not directed against the Jewish church,—the word “church”
being used here in precisely the same sense in which it is used to-day.
It was an insurrection against the “good and the just,” against
the “prophets of Israel,” against the hierarchy of society—not
against the latter’s corruption, but against caste, privilege, order,
formality. It was the lack of faith in “higher men,” it was a “Nay”
uttered against everything that was tinctured with the blood of priests
and theologians. But the hierarchy which was set in question if only
temporarily by this movement, formed the construction of piles upon
which, alone, the Jewish people was able to subsist in the midst of the
“waters”; it was that people’slastchance of survival wrested from
the world at enormous pains, theresiduumof its political autonomy:
to attack this construction was tantamount to attacking the most
profound popular instinct, the most tenacious national will to live
that has ever existed on earth. This saintly anarchist who called the
lowest of the low, the outcasts and “sinners,” the Chandala of Judaism,
to revolt against the established order of things (and inlanguage
which, if the gospels are to be trusted, would get one sent to Siberia
even to-day)—this man was a political criminal in so far as political
criminals were possible in a community so absurdly non-political. This
brought him to the cross: the proof of this is the inscription found
thereon. He died forhissins—and no matter how often the contrary
has been asserted there is absolutely nothing to show that he died for
the sins of others.28As to whether he was conscious of this contrast, or whether he was
merelyregardedas such, is quite another question. And here, alone,
do I touch upon the problem of the psychology of the Saviour.—I
confess there are few books which I have as much difficulty in reading
as the gospels. These difficulties are quite different from those which
allowed the learned curiosity of the German, mind to celebrate one
of its most memorable triumphs. Many years have now elapsed since I,
like every young scholar, with the sage conscientiousness of a refined
philologist, relished the work of the incomparable Strauss. I was then
twenty years of age; now I am too serious for that sort of thing. What
do I care about the contradictions of “tradition”? How can saintly
legends be called “tradition” at all! The stories of saints constitute
the most ambiguous literature on earth: to apply the scientific method
to them,when there are no other documents to hand,seems to me to be
a fatal procedure from the start—simply learned fooling.29The point that concerns me is the psychological type of the Saviour.
This type might be contained in the gospels, in spite of the gospels,
and however much it may have been mutilated, or overladen with
foreign features: just as that of Francis of Assisi is contained
in his legends in spite of his legends. It isnota question of
the truth concerning what he has done, what he has said, and how he
actually died; but whether his type may still be conceived in any way,
whether it has been handed down to us at all?—The attempts which
to my knowledge have been made to read thehistoryof a “soul” out
of the gospels, seem to me to point only to disreputable levity in
psychological matters. M. Renan, that buffoonin psychologies,has
contributed the two most monstrous ideas imaginable to the explanation
of the type of Jesus: the idea of thegeniusand the idea of thehero(“héros”). But if there is anything thoroughly unevangelical
surely it is the idea of the hero. It is precisely the reverse of all
struggle, of all consciousness of taking part in the fight, that has
become instinctive here: the inability to resist is here converted into
a morality (“resist not evil,” the profoundest sentence in the whole of
the gospels, their key in a certain sense), the blessedness of peace,
of gentleness, of notbeing ableto be an enemy. What is the meaning
of “glad tidings”?—True life, eternal life has been found—it is not
promised, it is actually here, it is inyou;it is life in love, in
love free from all selection or exclusion, free from all distance.
Everybody is the child of God—Jesus does not byany means claim
anything for himself alone,—as the child of God everybody is equal to
everybody else.... Fancy making Jesus ahero!—And what a tremendous
misunderstanding the word “genius” is! Our whole idea of “spirit,”
which is a civilised idea, could have had no meaning whatever in the
world in which Jesus lived. In the strict terms of the physiologist, a
very different word ought to be used here.... We know of a condition of
morbid irritability of the sense oftouch,which recoils shuddering
from every kind of contact, and from every attempt at grasping a solid
object. Any such physiologicalhabitusreduced to its ultimate
logical conclusion, becomes an instinctive hatred of all reality, a
flight into the “intangible,” into the “incomprehensible”; a repugnance
to all formulæ, to every notion of time and space, to everything that
is established such as customs, institutions, the church; a feeling
at one’s ease in a world in which no sign of reality is any longer
visible, a merely “inner” world, a “true” world, an “eternal” world....
“The Kingdom of God is within you”...30The instinctive hatred of realityis the outcome of an extreme
susceptibility to pain and to irritation, which can no longer endure to
be “touched” at all, because every sensation strikes too deep.The instinctive exclusion of all aversion, of all hostility, of all
boundaries and distances in feeling,is the outcome of an extreme
susceptibility to pain and to irritation, which regards all resistance,
all compulsory resistance as insufferableanguish(—that is tosay,
as harmful, asdeprecatedby the self-preservative instinct), and
which knows blessedness (happiness) only when it is no longer obliged
to offer resistance to anybody, either evil or detrimental,—love as
the Only ultimate possibility of life....These are the twophysiological realitiesupon which and out of which
the doctrine of salvation has grown. I call them a sublime further
development of hedonism, upon a thoroughly morbid soil. Epicureanism,
the pagan theory of salvation, even though it possessed a large
proportion of Greek vitality and nervous energy, remains the most
closely related to the above. Epicurus was atypicaldecadent: and I
was the first to recognise him as such.—The terror of pain, even of
infinitely slight pain—such a state cannot possibly help culminating
in areligionof love....31I have given my reply to the problem in advance. The prerequisite
thereto was the admission of the fact that the type of the Saviour has
reached us only in a very distorted form. This distortion in itself
is extremely feasible: for many reasons a type of that kind could not
be pure, whole, and free from additions. The environment in which
this strange figure moved, must have left its mark upon him, and the
history, thedestinyof the first Christian communities must have
done so to a still greater degree. Thanks to that destiny, the type
must have been enriched retrospectively with features which can be
interpreted only as serving the purposes of war and of propaganda
That strange and morbid world into which the gospels lead us—a
world which seems tohave been drawn from a Russian novel, where
the scum and dross of society, diseases of the nerves and “childish”
imbecility seem to have given each other rendezvous—must in any case
havecoarsenedthe type: the first disciples especially must have
translated an existence conceived entirely in symbols and abstractions
into their own crudities, in order at least to be able to understand
something about it,—for them the type existed only after it had
been cast in a more familiar mould.... The prophet, the Messiah, the
future judge, the teacher of morals, the thaumaturgist, John the
Baptist—all these were but so many opportunities of misunderstanding
the type.... Finally, let us not under-rate thepropriumof all great
and especially sectarian veneration: very often it effaces from the
venerated object, all the original and frequently painfully un-familiar
traits and idiosyncrasies—it does not even see them.It is greatly
to be deplored that no Dostoiewsky lived in the neighbourhood of this
most interesting decadent,—I mean someone who would have known how to
feel the poignant charm of such a mixture of the sublime, the morbid,
and the childlike. Finally, the type, as an example of decadence, may
actually have been extraordinarily multifarious and contradictory:
this, as a possible alternative, is not to be altogether ignored.
Albeit, everything seems to point away from it; for, precisely in this
case, tradition would necessarily have been particularly true and
objective: whereas we have reasons for assuming the reverse. Meanwhile
a yawning chasm of contradiction separates the mountain, lake, and
pastoral preacher, who strikes us as a Buddhaon a soil only very
slightly Hindu, from that combative fanatic, the mortal enemy of
theologians and priests, whom Renan’s malice has glorified as “le
grand maître en ironie.” For my part, I do not doubt but what the
greater part of this venom (and even ofesprit) was inoculated into
the type of the Master only as the outcome of the agitated condition
of Christian propaganda. For we have ample reasons for knowing the
unscrupulousness of all sectarians when they wish to contrive their ownapologyout of the person of their master. When the first Christian
community required a discerning, wrangling, quarrelsome, malicious and
hair-splitting theologian, to oppose other theologians, it created its
“God” according to its needs; just as it did not hesitate to put upon
his lips those utterly unevangelical ideas of “his second coming,” the
“last judgment,”—ideas with which it could not then dispense,—and
every kind of expectation and promise which happened to be current.32I can only repeat that I am opposed to the importation of the fanatic
into the type of the Saviour: the word “impérieux,” which Renan
uses, in itself annuls the type. The “glad tidings” are simply that
there are no longer any contradictions, that the Kingdom of Heaven is
for thechildren;the faith which raises its voice here is not a
faith that has been won by a struggle,—it is to hand, it was there
from the beginning, it is a sort of spiritual return to childishness.
The case of delayed and undeveloped puberty in the organism, as the
resultof degeneration is at least familiar to physiologists. A faith
of this sort does not show anger, it does not blame, neither does it
defend itself: it does not bring “the sword,”—it has no inkling of
how it will one day establish feuds between man and man. It does not
demonstrate itself, either by miracles, or by reward and promises, or
yet “through the scriptures”: it is in itself at every moment its own
miracle, its own reward, its own proof, its own “Kingdom of God.” This
faith cannot be formulated—it lives, it guards against formulas. The
accident of environment, of speech, of preparatory culture, certainly
determines a particular series of conceptions: early Christianity deals
only in Judæo-Semitic conceptions (—the eating and drinking at the
last supper form part of these,—this idea which like everything Jewish
has been abused so maliciously by the church). But one should guard
against seeing anything more than a language of signs, semiotics, an
opportunity for parables in all this. The very fact that no word is to
be taken literally, is the only condition on which this Anti-realist
is able to speak at all. Among Indians he would have made use of the
ideas of Sankhyara, among Chinese, those of Lao-tze—and would not
have been aware of any difference. With a little terminological laxity
Jesus might be called a “free spirit”—he cares not a jot for anything
that is established: the wordkilleth,everything fixedkilltth.The idea,experience,“life” as he alone knows it, is, according to
him, opposed to every kind of word, formula, law, faith and dogma. He
speaks only of the innermost things: “life” or“truth,” or “light,” is
his expression for the innermost thing,—everything else, the whole of
reality, the whole of nature, language even, has only the value of a
sign, of a simile for him.—It is of paramount importance not to make
any mistake at this point, however great may be the temptation thereto
that lies in Christian—I mean to say, ecclesiastical prejudice. Any
such essential symbolism stands beyond the pale of all religion, all
notions of cult, all history, all natural science, all experience of
the world, all knowledge, all politics, all psychology, all books and
all Art—for his “wisdom” is precisely the complete ignorance[4]of the
existence of such things. He has not even heard speak ofculture,he
does not require to oppose it,—he does not deny it.... The same holds
good of the state, of the whole of civil and social order, of work
and of war—he never had any reason to deny the world, he had not the
vaguest notion of the ecclesiastical concept “the world.” ... Denying
is precisely what was quite impossible to him.—Dialectic is also
quite absent, as likewise the idea that any faith, any “truth” can be
proved by argument (—his proofs are inner “lights,” inward feelings of
happiness and self-affirmation, a host of “proofs of power”—). Neither
can such a doctrine contradict, it does not even realise the fact that
there are or can be other doctrines, it is absolutely incapable of
imagining a contrary judgment.... Wherever it encounters such things,
from a feeling of profound sympathy itbemoans such “blindness,”—for
it sees the “light,”—but it raises no objections.33The whole psychology of the “gospels” lacks the concept of guilt and
punishment, as also that of reward. “Sin,” any sort of aloofness
between God and man, is done away with,—this is precisely what
constitutes the “glad tidings”.Eternal bliss is not promised, it is
not bound up with certain conditions; it is the only reality—the rest
consists only of signs wherewith to speak about it....The results of such a state project themselves into a new practice
of life, the actual evangelical practice. It is not a “faith” which
distinguishes the Christians: the Christian acts, he distinguishes
himself by means of adifferentmode of action. He does not resist
his enemy either by words or in his heart He draws no distinction
between foreigners and natives, between Jews and Gentiles (“the
neighbour” really means the co-religionist, the Jew). He is angry with
no one, he despises no one. He neither shows himself at the tribunals
nor does he acknowledge any of their claims (“Swear not at all”).
He never under any circumstances divorces his wife, even when her
infidelity has been proved.—All this is at bottom one principle, it is
all the outcome of one instinct—The life of the Saviour was naught else than this practice,—neither
was his death. He no longer required any formulæ, any rites for his
relations with God—not even prayer. He has done with allthe Jewish
teaching of repentance and of atonement; he alone knows themodeof life which makes one feel “divine,” “saved,” “evangelical,” and
at all times a “child of God.”Not“repentance,”not“prayer and
forgiveness” are the roads to God: theevangelical mode of life
aloneleads to God, itis“God.”—That which the gospels abolished
was the Judaism of the concepts “sin,” “forgiveness of sin,” “faith,”
“salvation through faith,”—the whole doctrine of the Jewish church was
denied by the “glad tidings.”The profound instinct of how one must live in order to feel “in
Heaven,” in order to feel “eternal,” while in every other respect
one feels bynomeans “in Heaven”: this alone is the psychological
reality of “Salvation.”—A new life andnota new faith....34If I understand anything at all about this great symbolist, it is
this that he regarded onlyinnerfacts as facts, as “truths,”—that
he understood the rest, everything natural, temporal, material
and historical, only as signs, as opportunities for parables. The
concept “the Son of Man,” is not a concrete personality belonging to
history, anything individual and isolated, but an “eternal” fact,
a psychological symbol divorced from the concept of time. The same
is true, and in the highest degree, of theGodof this typical
symbolist, of the “Kingdom of God,” of the “Kingdom of Heaven,” and
of the “Sonship of God.” Nothing is more un-Christlike than theecclesiastical crudityof a personal God, of a Kingdomof God that
is coming, of a “Kingdom of Heaven” beyond, of a “Son of God” as the
second person of the Trinity. All this, if I may be forgiven the
expression, is as fitting as a square peg in a round hole—and oh!
what a hole!—the gospels: aworld-historiccynicism in the scorn
of symbols.... But what is meant by the signs “Father” and “Son,” is
of course obvious—not to everybody, I admit: with the word “Son,”entranceinto the feeling of the general transfiguration of all
things (beatitude) is expressed, with the word “Father,”this feeling
itselfthe feeling of eternity and of perfection.—I blush to have to
remind you of what the Church has done with this symbolism: has it not
set an Amphitryon story at the threshold of the Christian “faith”? And
a dogma of immaculate conception into the bargain?...But by so doing
it defiled conception.——The “Kingdom of Heaven” is a state of the heart—not something
which exists “beyond this earth” or comes to you “after death.” The
whole idea of natural death is lacking in the gospels. Death is not
a bridge, not a means of access: it is absent because it belongs to
quite a different and merely apparent world the only use of which is
to furnish signs, similes. The “hour of death” is not a Christian
idea—the “hour,” time in general, physical life and its crises do not
exist for the messenger of “glad tidings.” ... The “Kingdom of God” is
not some thing that is expected; it has no yesterday nor any day after
to-morrow, it is not going to come in a “thousand years”—it is an
experience of a human heart; it is everywhere, it is nowhere....35This “messenger of glad tidings” died as he lived and as he
taught—notin order “to save mankind,” but in order to show how one
ought to live. It was a mode of life that he bequeathed to mankind: his
behaviour before his judges, his attitude towards his executioners,
his accusers, and all kinds of calumny and scorn,—his demeanour on
thecross.He offers no resistance; he does not defend his rights;
he takes no step to ward off the most extreme consequences, he does
more,—he provokes them. And he prays, suffers and loves with those, in
those, who treat him ill....Notto defend one’s self,notto show
anger, not to hold anyone responsible.... But to refrain from resisting
even the evil one,—tolovehim....36—Only we spirits that havebecome free,possess the necessary
condition for understanding something which nineteen centuries have
misunderstood,—that honesty which has become an instinct and a passion
in us, and which wages war upon the “holy lie” with even more vigour
than upon every other lie.... Mankind was unspeakably far from our
beneficent and cautious neutrality, from that discipline of the mind,
which, alone, renders the solution of such strange and subtle things
possible: at all times, with shameless egoism, all that people sought
was theirownadvantage in these matters, the Church was built up out
of contradiction to the gospel....Whoever might seek for signs pointing to the guiding fingers of an
ironical deity behind the greatcomedy of existence, would find no
small argument in thehuge note of interrogationthat is called
Christianity. The fact that mankind is on its knees before the reverse
of that which formed the origin, the meaning and therightsof
the gospel; the fact that, in the idea “Church,” precisely that is
pronounced holy which the “messenger of glad tidings” regarded asbeneathhim, asbehindhim—one might seek in vain for a more
egregious exampleof world-historicirony—-37—Our age is proud of its historical sense: how could it allow
itself to be convinced of the nonsensical idea that at the beginning
Christianity consisted only of theclumsy fable of the thaumaturgist
and of the Saviour,and that all its spiritual and symbolic
side was only developed later? On the contrary: the history of
Christianity—from the death on the cross onwards—is the history of
a gradual and ever coarser misunderstanding of an original symbolism.
With every extension of Christianity over ever larger and ruder
masses, who were ever less able to grasp its first principles, the
need ofvulgarising and barbarising itincreased proportionately—it
absorbed the teachings and rites of all thesubterraneancults of theimperium Romanum,as well as the nonsense of every kind of morbid
reasoning. The fatal feature of Christianity lies in the necessary
fact that its faith had to become as morbid, base and vulgar as the
needs to which it had to minister were morbid, base and vulgar.Morbid
barbarismat last braces itself together for power in the form of the
Church—the Church, this deadly hostility to all honesty, to all
loftiness of the soul, to all discipline of the mind, to all frank and
kindly humanity.—Christianandnoblevalues: only we spiritswho
have become free havere-established this contrast in values which is
the greatest that has ever existed on earth!—38—I cannot, at this point, stifle a sigh. There are days when I
am visited by a feeling blacker than the blackest melancholy—thecontempt of man.And in order that I may leave you in no doubt as
to what I despise,whomI despise: I declare that it is the man of
to-day, the man with whom I am fatally contemporaneous. The man of
to-day, I am asphyxiated by his foul breath.... Towards the past, like
all knights of knowledge, I am profoundly tolerant,—that is to say,
I exercise a sort ofgenerousself-control: with gloomy caution I
pass through whole millennia of this mad-house world, and whether it
be called “Christianity,” “Christian Faith,” or “Christian Church,” I
take care not to hold mankind responsible for its mental disorders.
But my feeling suddenly changes, and vents itself the moment I enter
the modern age,ourage. Our ageknows....That which formerly
was merely morbid, is now positively indecent It is indecent nowadays
to be a Christian.And it is here that my loathing begins.I look
about me: not a word of what was formerly known as “truth” has remained
standing; we can no longer endure to hear a priest even pronounce the
word “truth.” Even he whomakes but the most modest claims upon truth,mustknow at present, that a theologian, a priest, or a pope, not
only errs but actuallyties,with every word that he utters,—and
that he is no longer able to lie from “innocence,” from “ignorance.”
Even the priest knows quite as well as everybody else does that there
is no longer any “God,” any “sinner” or any “Saviour,” and that “free
will,” and “a moral order of the universe” arelies.Seriousness,
the profound self-conquest of the spirit no longer allows anyone to
beignorantabout this.... All the concepts of the Church have been
revealed in their true colours—that is to say, as the most vicious
frauds on earth, calculated todepreciatenature and all natural
values. The priest himself has been recognised as what he is—that is
to say, as the most dangerous kind of parasite, as the actual venomous
spider of existence.... At present we know, ourconscienceknows,
the real value of the gruesome inventions which the priests and the
Church have made,and what end they served.By means of them that
state of self-profanation on the part of man has been attained, the
sight of which makes one heave. The concepts “Beyond,” “Last Judgment,”
“Immortality of the Soul,” the “soul” itself, are merely so many
instruments of torture, so many systems of cruelty, on the strength
of which the priest became and remained master.... Everybody knows
this,and nevertheless everything remains as it was.Whither has
the last shred of decency, of self-respect gone, if nowadays even
our statesmen—a body of men who are otherwise so unembarrassed, and
such thorough anti-Christians in deed—still declare themselvesChristians and still flock to communion?[5].... Fancy a prince at the
head of his legions, magnificent as the expression of the egoism and
self-exaltation of his people,—butshamelessenough to acknowledge
himself a Christian!... What then does Christianity deny? What does
it call “world”? “The world” to Christianity means that a man is a
soldier, a judge, a patriot, that he defends himself, that he values
his honour, that he desires his own advantage, that he isproud.... The conduct of every moment, every instinct, every valuation that
leads to a deed, is at present anti-Christian: what anabortion of
falsehoodmodern man must be, in order to be ablewithout a blushstill to call himself a Christian!——39—I will retrace my steps, and will tell you thegenuinehistory of Christianity.—The very word “Christianity” is a
misunderstanding,—truth to tell, there never was more than one
Christian, and hediedon the Cross. The “gospel”diedon the
cross. That which thenceforward was called “gospel” was the reverse
of that “gospel” that Christ had lived: it was “evil tidings,” adysangelIt is false to the point of nonsense to see in “faith,”
in the faith in salvation through Christ, the distinguishing trait
of the Christian: the only thing that is Christian is the Christian
mode of existence, a life such as he led who died on the Cross.... To
this day a life of this kind is still possible; forcertain men, it
is even necessary: genuine, primitive Christianity will be possible
in all ages....Nota faith, but a course of action, above all a
course of inaction, non-interference, and a different life.... States
of consciousness, any sort of faith, a holding of certain things
for true, as every psychologist knows, are indeed of absolutely no
consequence, and are only of fifth-rate importance compared with the
value of the instincts: more exactly, the whole concept of intellectual
causality is false. To reduce the fact of being a Christian, or of
Christianity, to a holding of something for true, to a mere phenomenon
of consciousness, is tantamount to denying Christianity.In fact
there have never been any Christians.The “Christian,” he who for two
thousand years has been called a Christian, is merely a psychological
misunderstanding of self. Looked at more closely, there ruled in
him,notwithstandingall his faith, only instincts—andwhat
instincts!—“Faith” in all ages, as for instance in the case of
Luther, has always been merely a cloak, a pretext, ascreen,behind
which the instincts played their game,—a prudent form ofblindnessin regard to the dominion ofcertaininstincts. “Faith” I have
already characterised as a piece of really Christian cleverness; for
people have always spoken of “faith” and acted according to their
instincts.... In the Christian’s world of ideas there is nothing which
even touches reality: but I have already recognised in the instinctive
hatred of reality the actual motive force, the only driving power at
the root of Christianity. What follows therefrom? That here, evenin psychologicis,error is fundamental,—that is to say capable
of determining the spirit of things,—that is to say,substance.Take one idea away from the whole, and put one realistic fact in its
stead,—and the whole of Christianity tumbles into nonentity!—Surveyed
from above, this strangest of all facts,-a religion not only dependent
upon error, but inventive and showing signs of genius only in those
errors which are dangerous and which poison life and the human
heart—remains aspectacle for gods,for those gods who are at the
same time philosophers and whom I met for instance in those celebrated
dialogues on the island of Naxos. At the moment when they get rid
of theirloathing (—and we do as well!), they will be thankful
for the spectacle the Christians have offered: the wretched little
planet called Earth perhaps deserves on account ofthiscurious
case alone, a divine glance, and divine interest.... Let us not
therefore underestimate the Christians: the Christian, falseto the
point of innocence in falsity,is far above the apes,—in regard to
the Christians a certain well-known theory of Descent becomes a mere
good-natured compliment.40—The fate of the gospel was decided at the moment of the death,—it
hung on the “cross.” ... It was only death, this unexpected and
ignominious death; it was only the cross which as a rule was reserved
simply for thecanaille,—only this appalling paradox which
confronted the disciples with the actual riddle:Who was that? what
was that?—The state produced by the excited and profoundly wounded
feelings of these men, the suspicion that such a death might imply therefutationof their cause, and the terrible note of interrogation:
“why precisely thus?” will be understood only too well. In this case
everythingmustbe necessary, everything must have meaning, a reason,
the highest reason. The love of a disciple admits of no such thing as
accident. Only then did the chasm yawn: “who has killed him?” “who was
his natural enemy?”—this question rent the firmament like a flash of
lightning. Reply:dominantJudaism, its ruling class. Thenceforward
the disciple felt himself in revoltagainstestablished order; he
understood Jesus, after the fact, as one inrevolt against established
order.Heretofore this warlike, this nay-saying and nay-doing feature
in Christ had been lacking; nay more, he was its contradiction. The
small primitive community had obviously understoodnothingof the
principal factor of all, which was the example of freedom and of
superiority to every form ofresentmentwhich lay in this way of
dying. And this shows how little they understood him altogether! At
bottom Jesus could not have desired anything else by his death than to
give the strongest publicexampleandproofof his doctrine....
But his disciples were very far fromforgiving thisdeath—though if
they had done so it would have been in the highest sense evangelical
on their part,—neither were they prepared, with a gentle and serene
calmness of heart, toofferthemselves for a similar death....
Precisely the most unevangelical feeling,revenge,became once moreascendant. It was impossible for the cause to end with this death:
“compensation” and “judgment” were required (—and forsooth, what could
be more unevangelical than “compensation,” “punishment,” “judgment”!)
The popular expectation of a Messiah once more became prominent;
attention was fixed upon one historical moment: the “Kingdom of God”
descends to sit in judgment upon his enemies. But this proves that
everything was misunderstood: the “Kingdom of God” regarded as the last
scene of the last act, as a promise! But the Gospel had clearly been
the living, the fulfilment, therealityof this “Kingdom of God.”
It was precisely a death such as Christ’s that was this “Kingdom of
God.” It was only now that all the contempt for the Pharisees and the
theologians, and all bitter feelings towards them, were introduced
into the character of the Master,—and by this means he himself was
converted into a Pharisee and a theologian! On the other hand, the
savage veneration of these completely unhinged souls could no longer
endure that evangelical right of every man to be the child of God,
which Jesus had taught: their revenge consisted inelevatingJesus in
a manner devoid of all reason, and in separating him from themselves:
just as, formerly, the Jews, with the view of revenging themselves on
their enemies, separated themselves from their God, and placed him high
above them. The Only God, and the Only Son of God:—both were products
of resentment.41—And from this time forward an absurd problemrose into prominence:
“howcouldGod allow it to happen?” To this question the disordered
minds of the small community found a reply which in its absurdity
was literally terrifying: God gave his Son as asacrificefor the
forgiveness of sins. Alas! how prompt and sudden was the end of
the gospel! Expiatory sacrifice for guilt, and indeed in its most
repulsive and barbaric form,—the sacrifice of theinnocentfor
the sins of the guilty! What appalling Paganism!—For Jesus himself
had done away with the concept “guilt,”—he denied any gulf between
God and man, helivedthis unity between God and man, it was this
that constitutedhis“glad tidings.” ... And he didnotteach it
as a privilege!—Thenceforward there was gradually imported into the
type of the Saviour the doctrine of the Last Judgment, and of the
“second coming,” the doctrine of sacrificial death, and the doctrine
ofResurrection,by means of which the whole concept “blessedness,”
the entire and only reality of the gospel, is conjured away—in favour
of a stateafterdeath!... St Paul, with that rabbinic impudence
which characterises all his doings, rationalised this conception, this
prostitution of a conception, as follows: “if Christ did not rise from
the dead, our faith is vain.”—And, in a trice, the most contemptible
of all unrealisable promises, theimpudentdoctrine of personal
immortality, was woven out of the gospel.... St Paul even preached this
immortality as a reward.42You now realise what it was that came to an end with the death on the
cross: a new and thoroughlyoriginal effort towards a Buddhistic
movement of peace, towards real andnotmerely promisedhappiness
on earth.For, as I have already pointed out, this remains the
fundamental difference between the two religionsof decadence:Buddhism promises little but fulfils more, Christianity promises
everything but fulfils nothing.—The “glad tidings” were followed
closely by the absolutelyworsttidings—those of St Paul. Paul is
the incarnation of a type which is the reverse of that of the Saviour;
he is the genius in hatred, in the standpoint of hatred, and in the
relentless logic of hatred. And alas what did this dysangelist not
sacrifice to his hatred! Above all the Saviour himself: he nailed him
tohiscross. Christ’s life, his example, his doctrine and death,
the sense and the right of the gospel—not a vestige of alt this
was left, once this forger, prompted by his hatred, had understood
in it only that which could serve his purpose.Notreality:nothistorical truth! ... And once more, the sacerdotal instinct of
the Jew, perpetrated the same great crime against history,—he
simply cancelled the yesterday, and the day before that, out of
Christianity; hecontrived of his own accord a history of the birth
of Christianity.He did more: he once more falsified the history of
Israel, so as to make it appear as a prologue tohismission: all the
prophets had referred tohis“Saviour.” ... Later on the Church even
distorted the history of mankind so as to convert it into a prelude to
Christianity.... The type of the Saviour, his teaching, his life, his
death, the meaning of his death, even the sequel to his death—nothing
remained untouched, nothing was left which evenremotely resembled
reality. St Paul simply transferred the centre of gravity of the whole
of that great life, to a placebehindthis life,—in thelieof
the “resuscitated” Christ. At bottom, he had no possible use for the
life of the Saviour,—he needed the death on the cross,andsomething
more. To regard as honest a man like St Paul (a man whose home was the
very headquarters of Stoical enlightenment) when he devises a proof
of the continued existence of the Saviour out of a hallucination; or
even to believe him when he declares that he had this hallucination,
would amount to foolishness on the part of a psychologist: St Paul
desired the end, consequently he also desired the means.... Even what
he himself did not believe, was believed in by the idiots among whom
he spreadhisdoctrine.—What he wanted was power; with St Paul the
priest again aspired to power,—he could make use only of concepts,
doctrines, symbols with which masses may be tyrannised over, and
with which herds are formed. What was the only part of Christianity
which was subsequently borrowed by Muhamed? St Paul’s invention, his
expedient for priestly tyranny and to the formation of herds: the
belief in immortality—that is to say, the doctrine of the “Last
Judgment.” ...43When the centre of gravity of life is laid,notin life, but in a
beyond—in nonentity,—life is utterly robbed of its balance. The
great lie of personal immortality destroys all reason, all nature in
the instincts,—everything in the instincts that is beneficent, that
promotes life and that is a guaranteeof the future, henceforward
aroused suspicion. The very meaning of life is now construed as the
effort to live in such a way that life no longer has any point.... Why
show any public spirit? Why be grateful for one’s origin and one’s
forebears? Why collaborate with one’s fellows, and be confident? Why
be concerned about the general weal or strive after it?... All these
things are merely so many “temptations,” so many deviations from the
“straight path.” “One thing only is necessary.” ... That everybody, as
an “immortal soul,” should have equal rank, that in the totality of
beings, the “salvation” of each individual may lay claim to eternal
importance, that insignificant bigots and three-quarter-lunatics may
have the right to suppose that the laws of nature may be persistentlybrokenon their account,—any such magnification of every kind
of selfishness to infinity, toinsolence,cannot be branded with
sufficient contempt And yet it is to this miserable flattery of
personal vanity that Christianity owes itstriumph,—by this means
it lured all the bungled and the botched, all revolting and revolted
people, all abortions, the whole of the refuse and offal of humanity,
over to its side. The “salvation of the soul”—in plain English: “the
world revolves around me” ... The poison of the doctrine “equalrights for all”—has been dispensed with the greatest thoroughness by
Christianity: Christianity, prompted by the most secret recesses of
bad instincts, has waged a deadly war upon all feeling of reverence
and distance between man and man—that is to say, theprerequisiteof all elevation, of every growth in culture; out ofthe resentment
of the masses it wrought itsprincipal weaponsagainst us, against
everything noble, joyful, exalted on earth, against our happiness on
earth.... To grant “immortality” to every St Peter and St Paul, was
the greatest, the most vicious outrage uponnoblehumanity that has
ever been perpetrated.—And do not let us underestimate the fatal
influence which, springing from Christianity, has insinuated itself
even into politics! Nowadays no one has the courage of special rights,
of rights of t dominion, of a feeling of self-respect and of respect
for his equals,—ofpathos of distance.Our politics are diseased
with this lack of courage!—The aristocratic attitude of mind has been
most thoroughly undermined by the lie of the equality of souls; and if
the belief in the “privilege of the greatest number” creates and will
continueto create revolutions,—it is Christianity, let there be no
doubt about it, and Christian values, which convert every revolution
into blood and crime! Christianity is the revolt of all things that
crawl on their bellies against everything that is lofty: the gospel of
the “lowly”lowers....44—The Gospels are invaluable as a testimony of the corruption which
was already persistentwithinthe first Christian communities. That
which St Paul, with the logician’s cynicism of a Rabbi, carried to its
logical conclusion, was nevertheless merely the process of decay which
began with the death of the Saviour.—These gospels cannot be read
too cautiously; difficulties lurk behind every word theycontain. I
confess, and people will not take this amiss, that they are precisely
on that account a joy of the first rank for a psychologist,—as the
reverse of all naive perversity, as refinementpar excellence,as
a masterpiece of art in psychological corruption. The gospels stand
alone. Altogether the Bible allows of no comparison. Thefirstthing
to be remembered if we do not wish to lose the scent here, is, that
we are among Jews. The dissembling of holiness which, here, literally
amounts to genius, and which has never been even approximately achieved
elsewhere either by books or by men, this fraud in word and pose
which in this book is elevated to anArt,is not the accident of
any individual gift, of any exceptional nature. These qualities are
a matter ofrace.With Christianity, the art of telling holy lies,
which constitutes the whole of Judaism, reaches its final mastership,
thanks to many centuries of Jewish and most thoroughly serious training
and practice. The Christian, thisultima ratioof falsehood, is the
Jew over again—he is even three times a Jew.... The fundamental will
only to make use of concepts, symbols and poses, which are demonstrated
by the practice of the priests, the instinctive repudiation of every
other kind of practice, every other standpoint of valuation and of
utility—all this is not only tradition, it ishereditary;only as
an inheritance is it able to work like nature. The whole of mankind,
the best brains, and even the best ages—(one man only excepted who
is perhaps only a monster)—have allowed themselves to be deceived.
The gospels were read as thebook of innocence ...this is no
insignificantsign of the virtuosity with which deception has been
practised here.—Of course, if we could only succeed in seeing all
these amazing bigots and pretended saints, even for a moment, all
would be at an end—and it is precisely becauseIcan read no
single word of theirs, without seeing their pretentious poses,that
I have made an end of them.... I cannot endure a certain way they
have of casting their eyes heavenwards.—Fortunately for Christianity,
books are for the greatest number, merely literature. We must not let
ourselves be led away: “judge not!” they say, but they dispatch all
those to hell who stand in their way. Inasmuch as they let God do the
judging, they themselves, judge; inasmuch as they glorify God, they
glorify themselves; inasmuch as they exact those virtues of which
they themselves happen to be capable—nay more, of which they are in
need in order to be able to remain on top at all;—they assume the
grand airs of struggling for virtue, of struggling for the dominion of
virtue. “We live, we die, we sacrifice ourselves for the good” (—“the
Truth,” “the Light,” “the Kingdom of God”): as a matter of fact they
do only what they cannot help doing. Like sneaks they have to play a
humble part; sit away in corners, and remain obscurely in the shade,
and they make all this appear a duty; their humble life now appears as
a duty, and their humility is one proof the more of their piety!...
Oh, what a humble, chaste and compassionate kind of falsity! “Virtue
itself shall bear us testimony.” ... Only read the gospels as books
calculated to seduce by means of morality: morality is appropriated by
these petty people,—they knowwhat morality can do! The best way of
leading mankind by the nose is with morality! The fact is that the most
consciousconceitof people who believe themselves to bechosen,here simulates modesty: in this way they, the Christian community, the
“good and the just” place themselves once and for all on a certain
side, the side “of Truth”—and the rest of mankind, “the world” on
the other.... This was the most fatal kind of megalomania that had
ever yet existed on earth: insignificant little abortions of bigots
and liars began to lay sole claim to the concepts “God,” “Truth,”
“Light,” “Spirit,” “Love,” “Wisdom,” “Life,” as if these things were,
so to speak, synonyms of themselves, in order to fence themselves off
from “the world”; little ultra-Jews, ripe for every kind of madhouse,
twisted values round in order to suit themselves, just as if the
Christian, alone, were the meaning, the salt, the standard and even the
“ultimate tribunal” of all the rest of mankind.... The whole fatality
was rendered possible only because a kind of megalomania, akin to this
one and allied to it in race,—the Jewish kind—was already to hand in
the world: the very moment the gulf between Jews and Judæo-Christians
was opened, the latter had no alternative left, but to adopt the same
self-preservative measures as the Jewish instinct suggested, evenagainstthe Jews themselves, whereas the Jews, theretofore, had
employed these same measures only against the Gentiles. The Christian
is nothing more than an anarchical Jew.45—Let me give you a few examples of what thesepaltry people have
stuffed into their heads, what they have laidon the lips of their
Master: quite a host of confessions from “beautiful souls.”—“And whosoever shall not receive you, nor hear you, when ye depart
thence, shake off the dust under your feet for a testimony against
them. Verily I say unto you, It shall be more tolerable for Sodom
and Gomorrah in the day of judgment, than for that city.” (Mark vi.
11.)—How evangelical!...“And whosoever shall offend one of these little ones that believe in
me, it is better for him that a millstone were hanged about his neck,
and he were cast into the sea.” (Mark ix. 42.)—Howevangelical!...“And if thine eye offend thee, pluck it out: it fa better for thee to
enter into the kingdom of God with one eye, than having two eyes to be
cast into hell fire: where their worm dieth not, and the fire is not
quenched.” (Mark ix. 47, 48.)—The eye is not precisely what is meant
in this passage....“Verily I say unto you, That there be some of them that stand here,
which shall not taste of death, till they have seen the kingdom of God
come with power.” (Mark ix. 1.)—Welllied,lion![6]...“Whosoever will come after me, let him deny himself, and take up his
cross, and follow me.For...” (A psychologist’s comment.Christian
morality is refuted by its “For’s”: its “reasons” refute,—this is
Christian.) (Mark viii. 34.)“Judge not, that ye be not judged. For with what judgment ye judge,
ye shall be judged.” (Matthew vii. I, 2.)—What a strange notion of
justice on the part of a “just” judge!...“For if ye love them which love you, what reward have ye? do not even
the publicans the same? And if ye salute your brethren only, what do ye
morethan others?do not even the publicans so?” (Matthew v. 46, 47.)
The principle of “Christian love”: it insists upon beingwell paid....“But if ye forgive not men their trespasses neither will your Father
forgive your trespasses.” (Matthew vi. 15.)—Very compromising for the
“Father” in question.“But seek ye first the kingdom of God, and his righteousness; and all
these things shall be added unto you.” (Matthew vi. 33)—“All these
things”—that is to say, food, clothing, all the necessities of life.
To use a moderate expression, this is anerror .... Shortly before
this God appears as a tailor, at least in certain cases....“Rejoice ye in that day, and leap for joy: for, behold, your rewardisgreat in heaven: for in the like manner did their fathers unto
the prophets.” (Luke vi. 23.)—Impudentrabble! They dare to compare
themselves with the prophets....“Know ye not that ye are the temple of God andthatthe Spirit of God
dwelleth in you? If any man defile the temple of God,him shall God
destroy;for the temple of God is holy, whichtemple ye are.” (St
Paul, I Corinthians iii. 16, 17.)—One cannot have too much contempt
for this sort of thing....“Do ye not know that the saints shall judge the world? and if the world
shall be judged by you, are ye unworthy to judge the smallest matters?”
(St Paul, I Corinthians vi. 2.)—Unfortunately this is not merely the
speech of a lunatic.... Thisappalling impostorproceeds thus: “Know
ye not that we shall judge angels? how much more things that pertain to
this life?”“Hath not God made foolish the wisdom of this world? For after that in
the wisdom of God, the world by wisdom knew not God, it pleased God by
the foolishness of preaching to save them that believe ... not many
wise men after the flesh, not many mighty, not many nobleare called;But God hath chosen the foolish things of the world to confound the
wise; and God hath chosen the weak things of the world to confound
the things which are mighty; And base things of the world, and things
which are despised, hath God chosen;yea,and things which are not,
to bring to nought things that are: That no flesh should glory in
his presence.” (St Paul, I Corinthians i. 20et seq.)—In order tounderstandthis passage, which is of the highest importance as an
example of the psychology of every Chandala morality, the reader should
refer to myGenealogy of Morals:in this book, the contrast between
anobleand a Chandala morality born ofresentmentand impotent
revengefulness, is brought to light for the first time. St Paul was the
greatest of all the apostles of revenge....46What follows from this?That one does well toput on one’s gloves
when reading the New Testament The proximity of so much pitch almost
defiles one. We should feel just as little inclined to hobnob with
“the first Christians” as with Polish Jews: not that we need explain
our objections.... They simply smell bad.—In vain have I sought for a
single sympathetic feature in the New Testament; there is not a trace
of freedom, kindliness, open-heartedness and honesty to be found in
it. Humaneness has not even made a start in this book, whilecleanlyinstincts are entirely absent from it.... Only evil instincts are to be
found in the New Testament, it shows no sign of courage, these people
lack even the courage of their evil instincts. All is cowardice, all is
a closing of one’s eyes and self-deception. Every book becomes clean,
after one has just read the New Testament: for instance, immediately
after laying down St Paul, I read with particular delight that most
charming and most wanton of scoffers, Petronius, of whom someone might
say what Domenico Boccaccio wrote to the Duke of Parma about Cæsar
Borgia: “è tutto festo”—immortally healthy, immortally cheerful
and well-constituted. ... These petty bigots err in their calculations
and in the most important thing of all. They certainly attack; but
everything they assail is, by that very fact alone,distinguished.He whom a “primitive Christian” attacks, isnotthereby sullied....
Conversely it is an honour to be opposed by “primitive Christians.”
One cannot read the New Testament without feeling a preference for
everything in it which is the subject of abuse—not to speak of the
“wisdom of this world,”which an impudent windbag tries in vain to
confound “by the foolishness of preaching.” Even the Pharisees and the
Scribes derive advantage from such opposition: they must certainly
have been worth something in order to have been hated in such a
disreputable way. Hypocrisy—as if this were a reproach which the
“first Christians”were at libertyto make!—After all the Scribes
and Pharisees were theprivileged ones;this was quite enough, the
hatred of the Chandala requires no other reasons. I very much fear
that the “first Christian”—as also the “last Christian” whom I may
yet be able to meet,—is in his deepest instincts a rebel against
everything privileged; he lives and struggles unremittingly for “equal
rights”!... Regarded more closely, he has no alternative.... If one’s
desire be personally to represent “one of the chosen of God”—or a
“temple of God,” or “a judge of angels,”—then everyotherprinciple
of selection, for instance that based upon a standard of honesty,
intellect, manliness and pride, or upon beauty and freedom of heart,
becomes the “world,”—evil in itself.Moral: every word on the lips
of a “first Christian” is a lie, every action he does is an instinctive
falsehood,—all his values, all his aims are pernicious; but the man
he, hates,the thinghe hates,has value.... The Christian, more
particularly the Christian priest, is acriterion of values—Do I
require to add that in the whole of the New Testament onlyonefigure
appears which we cannot help respecting? Pilate, the Roman Governor. To
take a Jewish quarrelseriouslywas a thing he could not get himself
to do. One Jew more or less—what did it matter?... The noblescorn
of a Roman, in whose presence the word “truth” had been shamelessly
abused, has enriched the New Testament with the only saying whichis
of value,—and this saying is not only the criticism, but actually the
shattering of that Testament: “What is truth!”...47—That which separates us from other people is not the fact that
we can discover no God, either in history, or in nature, or behind
nature,—but that we regard what has been revered as “God,” not as
“divine,” but as wretched, absurd, pernicious; not as an error, but as
acrime against life.... We deny God as God.... If the existence
of this Christian God wereprovedto us, we should feel even less
able to believe in him.—In a formula:deus qualem Paulus creavit,
dei negatio.—A religion such as Christianity which never once comes
in touch with reality, and which collapses the very moment reality
asserts its rights even on one single point, must naturally be a mortal
enemy of the “wisdom of this world”—that is to say,science.It
will call all those means good with which mental discipline, lucidity
and severity in intellectual matters, nobility and freedom of the
intellect may be poisoned, calumniated anddecried. “Faith” as an
imperative is avetoagainst science,—in praxi,it means lies
at any price. St Paulunderstoodthat falsehood—that “faith” was
necessary; subsequently the Church understood St Paul.—That “God”
which St Paul invented for himself, a God who “confounds” the “wisdom
of this world” (in a narrower sense, thetwo great opponents of all
superstition, philology and medicine), means, in very truth, simply St
Paul’s firmresolveto do so: to call his own will “God”,thora,that is arch-Jewish. St Paul insists upon confounding the “wisdom of
this world”: his enemies are thegood oldphilologists and doctors of
the Alexandrine schools; it is on them that he wages war. As a matter
of fact no one is either a philologist or a doctor, who is not also anAntichrist.As a philologist, for instance, a man seesbehindthe
“holy books,” as a doctor he seesbehindthe physiological rottenness
of the typical Christian. The doctor says “incurable,” the philologist
says “forgery.”48—Has anybody ever really understood the celebrated story which stands
at the beginning of the Bible,—concerning God’s deadly panic overscience?... Nobody has understood it This essentially sacerdotal
book naturally begins with the great inner difficulty of the priest:heknows only one great danger,consequently“God” has only one
great danger.—The old God, entirely “spirit,” a high-priest through and through, and
wholly perfect, is wandering in a leisurely fashion round his garden;
but he is bored. Against boredom even the gods themselves struggle in
vain.[7]What does he do? He invents man,—man is entertaining.... But,
behold,even man begins to be bored. God’s compassion for the only
form of misery which is peculiar to all paradises, exceeds all bounds:
so forthwith he creates yet other animals. God’sfirstmistake: man
did not think animals entertaining,—he dominated them, he did not even
wish to be an “animal.” Consequently God created woman. And boredom did
indeed cease from that moment,—but many other things ceased as well!
Woman was God’ssecondmistake.—“Woman in her innermost nature is a
serpent, Heva”—every priest knows this: “all evil came into this world
through woman,”—every priest knows this too. “Consequently sciencealso comes from woman.” ... Only through woman did man learn to taste
of the tree of knowledge.—What had happened? Panic had seized the
old God Man himself had been hisgreatestmistake, he had created
a rival for himself, science makes youequal to God,—it is all up
with priests and gods when man becomes scientific!—Moral: science is
the most prohibited thing of all,—it alone, is forbidden. Science is
thefirst,the germ of all sins, the original sin.This alone is
morality.—“Thou shaltnotknow”:—the rest follows as a matter of
course, God’s panic did not deprive him of his intelligence. How can
oneguardagainst science? For ages this was his principal problem.
Reply: man must be kicked out of paradise! Happiness, leisure leads to
thinking,—all thoughts are bad thoughts.... Manmustnot think.—And
the “priest-per-se” proceeds to invent distress, death, the vital
danger of pregnancy, every kind of misery, decrepitude, and affliction,
and above alldisease,—all these are but weaponsemployed in the
struggle with science! Trouble prevents man from thinking.... And
notwithstanding all these precautions! Oh, horror! the work of science
towers aloft, it storms heaven itself, it rings the death-knell of the
gods,—what’s to be done?—The old God inventswar;he separates the
nations, and contrives to make men destroy each other mutually (—the
priests have always been in need of war....) War, among other things,
is a great disturber of science!—Incredible! Knowledge,the rejection
of the sacerdotal yoke,nevertheless increases.—So the old God
arrives at this final decision: “Man has become scientific,—there is
no help for it, he must be drowned!” ...