49You have understood me The beginning of the Bible contains the whole
psychology of the priest—The priest knows only one great danger, and
that is science,—the healthy concept of cause and effect But, on the
whole, science flourishes onlyunder happy conditions,—a man must
have time, he must also have superfluous mental energy in order to
“pursue knowledge” ... “Consequentlyman must be made unhappy,”—this
has been the argument of the priest of all ages.—You have already
divined what, in accordance with such a manner of arguing, must
first have come into the world:—“sin.” ... The notion of guilt and
punishment, the whole “moral order of the universe,” was invented
against science,—against the deliverance of man from the priest....
Man mustnotcast his glance upon the outer world, he must turn it
inwards into himself; he must not asa learner look cleverly and
cautiouslyintothings; he must not see at all: he mustsuffer.... And he must suffer, so that he may be in need of the priest every
minute.—Away with doctors! What is needed is a Saviour!—The notion of
guilt and punishment, including the doctrine of “grace,” of “salvation”
and of “forgiveness”—allliesthrough and through without a shred
of psychological reality—were invented in order to destroy man’ssense of causality:they are an attack on the concept of cause and
effect!—Andnotan attack with the fist, with the knife, with
honesty in hate and love! But one actuated by the most cowardly, most
crafty, and most ignoble instincts! Apriestsattack! Aparasite’sattack! A vampyrism of pale subterranean leeches!—... When the natural
consequences of an act are no longer “natural,” but are thought to
be conjured up by phantom concepts of superstition, by “God,” by
“spirits,” and by “souls,” as merely moral consequences, in the form
of rewards, punishments, hints, and educational means,—then the whole
basis of knowledge is destroyed,—then the greatest crime against man
has been perpetrated.—Sin, I repeat, this form of self-pollutionpar
excellenceon the part of man, was invented in order to make science,
culture and every elevation and noble trait in man quite impossible; by
means of the invention of sin the priest is able torule.50—I cannot here dispense with a psychology of “faith” and of the
“faithful,” which will naturally be to the advantage of the “faithful.”
If to-day thereare still many who do not know how veryindecentit
is to be a “believer”—orto what extent such a state is the sign
of decadence, and of the broken will to Life,—they will know it no
later than to-morrow. My voice can make even those hear who are hard
of hearing.—If perchance my ears have not deceived me, it seems that
among Christians there is such a thing as a kind of criterion of truth,
which is called “the proof of power.” “Faith saveth;thereforeit
is true.”—It might be objected here that it is precisely salvation
which is not proved but onlypromised:salvation is bound up with
the condition “faith,”—oneshallbe saved,becauseone has
faith.... But how provethatthat which the priest promises to the
faithful really will take place, to wit: the “Beyond” which defies
all demonstration?—The assumed “proof of power” is at bottom once
again only a belief in the fact that the effect which faith promises
will not fail to take place. In a formula: “I believe that faith
saveth;—consequentlyit is true.”—But with this we are at the end
of our tether. This “consequently” would be theabsurdumitself as
a criterion of truth.—Let us be indulgent enough to assume, however,
that salvation is proved by faith (—notonly desired, andnotmerely promised by the somewhat suspicious lips of a priest): could
salvation—or, in technical terminology,happiness—ever be a proof
of truth? So little is it so that, when pleasurable sensations make
their influence felt in replying to the question “what is true,” they
furnish almost the contradiction of truth, or at any rate they make
it in the highest degree suspicious. The proof through “happiness,”
is a proof of happiness—andnothing else; why in the world should
we take it for granted thattruejudgments cause more pleasure than
false ones, and that in accordance with a pre-established harmony, they
necessarily bring pleasant feelings in their wake?—The experience of
all strict and profound minds teaches thereverse.Every inch of
truth has been conquered only after a struggle, almost everything to
which our heart, our love and our trust in life cleaves, has had to be
sacrificed for it Greatness of soul is necessary for this: the service
of truth is the hardest of all services.—What then is meant by honesty
in things intellectual? It means that a man is severe towards his own
heart, that he scorns “beautiful feelings,” and that he makes a matter
of conscience out of every Yea and Nay!—-Faith saveth:consequentlyit lies....51The fact that faith may in certain circumstances save, the fact that
salvation as the result of anidée fixedoes not constitute a true
idea, the fact that faith movesnomountains, but may very readily
raise them where previously they did not exist—all these things are
made sufficiently clear by a mere casual stroll through alunatic
asylum.Of coursenopriest would find this sufficient: for he
instinctively denies that illness is illness or that lunatic asylums
are lunatic asylums. Christianity is inneedof illness, just as
Ancient Greece was in need of a superabundance of health. The actual
ulterior motive of the whole of the Church’s system of salvation
is tomake people ill.And is not the Church itself the Catholic
madhouse as an ultimateideal?—The earth as a whole converted into a
madhouse?—The kind of religious man which the Church aims at producing
is a typicaldecadentThe moment of time at which a religious crisis
attains the ascendancy over a people, is always characterised by
nerve-epidemics; the “inner world” of the religious man is ridiculously
like the “inner world” of over-irritable and exhausted people; the
“highest” states which Christianity holds up to mankind as the value
of values, are epileptic in character,—the Church has pronounced only
madmenorgreat swindlersin majorem dei honoremholy. Once I
ventured to characterise the whole of the Christian training of penance
and salvation (which nowadays is best studied in England) as afolie
circulairemethodically generated upon a soil which, of course, is
already prepared for it,—that is to say, which is thoroughly morbid.
Not every one who likes can be a Christian: no man is “converted”
to Christianity,—he must be sick enough for it ... We others who
possess enough courage both for health and for contempt, how rightlywemay despise a religion which taught men to misunderstand the
body I which would not rid itself of the superstitions of the soul!
which made a virtue of taking inadequate nourishment! which in health
combats a sort of enemy, devil, temptation! which persuaded itself that
it was possible to bear a perfect soul about in a cadaverous body,
and which, to this end, had to make up for itself a new concept of
“perfection,” a pale, sickly, idiotically gushing ideal,—so-called
“holiness,”—holiness, which in itself is simply a symptom ofan
impoverished, enervated and incurably deteriorated body!... The
movement of Christianity, as a European movement, was from first to
last, a general accumulation of the ruck and scum of all sorts and
kinds (—and these, by means of Christianity, aspire to power). It
doesnotexpress the downfall of a race, it is rather a conglomerate
assembly of all the decadent elements from everywhere which seek each
other and crowd together. It was not, as some believe, the corruption
of antiquity, ofnobleantiquity, which made Christianity possible:
the learned idiocy which nowadays tries to support such a notion cannot
be too severely contradicted. At the time when the morbid and corrupted
Chandala classes became Christianised in the whole of theimperium,the verycontrary type,nobility, was extant in its finest and
maturest forms. The greatest number became master; the democracy of
Christian instincts triumphed.... Christianity was not “national,” it
was not determined by race,—it appealed to all the disinherited forms
of life, it had its allies everywhere. Christianity is built upon the
rancour of the sick; its instinct is directedagainstthe sound,
against health. Everything well-constituted, proud, high-spirited,
and beautiful is offensive to its ears and eyes. Again I remind you
of St Paul’s priceless words: “And God hath chosen theweakthings
of the world, thefoolishthings of the world; andbasethings of
the world, and things which aredespised”: this was the formula,in
hoc signodecadence triumphed.—God on the Cross—does no one yet
understand the terrible ulterior motive of thissymbol?—Everything
that suffers, everything that hangs on the cross, isdivine....All
of us hang on the cross, consequently we aredivine .... We alone are
divine.... Christianity was a victory; anoblertype of character
perished through it,—Christianity has been humanity’s greatest
misfortune hitherto.——52Christianity also stands opposed to everything happily constituted
in themind,—it can make use only of morbid reason as Christian
reason; it takes the side of everything idiotic, it utters a curse
upon “intellect,” upon thesuperbiaof the healthy intellect. Since
illness belongs to the essence of Christianity, the typically Christian
state, “faith,”mustalso be a form of illness, and all straight,
honest and scientific roads to knowledge must be repudiated by the
Church as forbidden.... Doubt in itself is already a sin.... The total
lack of psychological cleanliness in the priest, which reveals itself
in his look, is aresultof decadence. Hysterical women, as also
children with scrofulous constitutions, should be observed as a proof
of how invariably instinctive falsity, the love of lying for the sake
of lying, and the in ability either to look or to walk straight, are
the expression of decadence. “Faith” simply means the refusal to know
what is true. The pious person, the priest of both sexes, is false
because he is ill: his instinctdemandsthat truth should not assert
its right anywhere. “That which makes ill is good: that which proceeds
from abundance, from superabundance and from power, is evil”: that
is the view of the faithful. Theconstraint to lie—that isthe
sign by which I recognise every predetermined theologian.—Another
characteristic of the theologian is his lack ofcapacityforphilology.What I mean here by the word philology is, in a general
sense to be understood as the art of reading well, of being able to
take account of factswithoutfalsifying them by interpretation,
without losing either caution, patience or subtlety owing to one’s
desire to understand. Philology asephexis[8]in interpretation,
whether one be dealing with books, newspaper reports, human destinies
or meteorological records,—not to speak of the “salvation of the
soul.” ... The manner in which a theologian, whether in Berlin or in
Rome, interprets a verse from the “Scriptures,” or an experience, or
the triumph of his nation’s army for instance, under the superior
guiding light of David’s Psalms, is always so exceedinglydaring,that it is enough to make a philologist’s hair stand on end. And what
is he to do, when pietists and other cows from Swabia explain their
miserable every-day lives in their smoky hovels by means of the “Finger
of God,” a miracle of “grace,” of “Providence,” of experiences of
“salvation”! The most modest effort of the intellect, not to speak of
decent feeling, ought at least to lead these interpreters to convince
themselves of the absolute childishness and unworthiness of any such
abuse of the dexterity of God’s fingers. However small an amount of
loving piety we mightpossess, a god who cured us in time of a cold in
the nose, or who arranged for us to enter a carriage just at the moment
when a cloud burst over our heads, would be such an absurd God, that he
would have to be abolished, even if he existed.[9]God as a domestic
servant, as a postman, as a general provider,—in short, merely a word
for the most foolish kind of accidents.... “Divine Providence,” as it
is believed in to-day by almost every third man in “cultured Germany,”
would be an argument against God, in fact it would be the strongest
argument against God that could be Imagined. And in any case it is an
argument against the Germans.53—The notion that martyrs prove anything at all in favour of a thing,
is so exceedingly doubtful, that I would fain deny that there has ever
yet existed a martyr who had anything to do with truth. In the very
manner in which a martyr flings his little parcel of truth at the
head of the world, such a low degree of intellectual honesty and such
obtuseness in regard to the question “truth” makes itself felt, that
one never requires to refute a martyr. Truth is not a thing which one
might have and another be without:only peasants or peasant-apostles,
after the style of Luther, can think like this about truth. You may be
quite sure, that the greater a man’s degree of conscientiousness may
be in matters intellectual, the more modest he will show himself on
this point Toknowabout five things, and with a subtle wave of the
hand to refuse to knowothers.... “Truth” as it is understood by
every prophet, every sectarian, every free thinker, every socialist and
every church-man, is an absolute proof of the fact that these people
haven’t even begun that discipline of the mind and that process of
self-mastery, which is necessary for the discovery of any small, even
exceedingly small truth.—Incidentally, the deaths of martyrs have
been a great misfortune in the history of the world: they led people
astray.... The conclusion which all idiots, women and common people
come to, that there must be something in a cause for which someone lays
down his life (or which, as in the case of primitive Christianity,
provokes an epidemic of sacrifices),—this conclusion put a tremendous
check upon all investigation, upon the spirit of investigation and of
caution. Martyrs haveharmedthe cause of truth. ... Even to this day
it only requires the crude fact of persecution, in order to create an
honourable name for any obscure sect who does not matter in the least
What? is a cause actually changed in any way by the fact that some
one has laid down his life for it? An error which becomes honourable,
is simply an error that possesses one seductive charm the more: do
you suppose, dear theologians, that we shall give you the chance of
acting the martyrs for your lies?—A thing is refuted by being laidrespectfully on ice, and theologians are refuted in the same way. This
was precisely the world-historic foolishness of all persecutors; they
lent the thing they combated a semblance of honour by conferring the
fascination of martyrdom upon it.... Women still lie prostrate before
an error to-day, because they have been told that some one died on the
cross for itIs the cross then an argument?—But concerning all these
things, one person alone has said what mankind has been in need of for
thousands of years,—Zarathustra.“Letters of blood did they write on the way they went, and their folly
taught that truth is proved by blood.“But blood is the very worst testimony of truth; blood poisoneth even
the purest teaching, and turneth it into delusion and into blood feuds.“And when a man goeth through fire for his teaching—what does that
prove? Verily, it is more when out of one’s own burning springeth one’s
own teaching.”[10]54Do not allow yourselves to be deceived: great minds are sceptical.
Zarathustra is a sceptic. Strength and thefreedomwhich proceeds
from the power and excessive power of the mind,manifestsitself
through scepticism. Men of conviction are of no account whatever
in regard to any principles of value or of non-value. Convictions
are prisons. They never see far enough, they do not look down from
a sufficient height: but in order to have anysay in questions of
value and non-value, a man must see five hundred convictionsbeneathhim,—behindhim.... A spirit who desires great things, and who also
desires the means thereto, is necessarily a sceptic. Freedom from every
kind of convictionbelongsto strength, to theabilityto open
one’s eyes freely.... The great passion of a sceptic, the basis and
power of his being, which is more enlightened and more despotic than he
is himself, enlists all his intellect into its service; it makes him
unscrupulous; it even gives him the courage to employ unholy means;
in certain circumstances it even allows him convictions. Conviction
as ameans:much is achieved merely by means of a conviction. Great
passion makes use of and consumes convictions, it does not submit to
them—it knows that it is a sovereign power. Conversely; the need of
faith, of anything either absolutely affirmative or negative, Carlylism
(if I may be allowed this expression), is the need ofweakness.The man of beliefs, the “believer” of every sort and condition, is
necessarily a dependent man;—he is one who cannot regardhimselfas
an aim, who cannot postulate aims from the promptings of his own heart
The “believer” does not belong to himself, he can be only a means,
he must beused up,he is in need of someone who uses him up. His
instinct accords the highest honour to a morality of self-abnegation:
everything in him, his prudence, his experience, his vanity, persuade
him to adopt this morality. Every sort of belief is in itself an
expression of self-denial, of self-estrangement. ... If one considers
how necessary a regulating code of conduct is to the majority of
people, acode of conduct which constrains them and fixes them from
outside; and how control, or in a higher sense,slavery,is the only
and ultimate condition under which the weak-willed man, and especially
woman, flourish; one also understands conviction, “faith.” The man
of conviction finds in the latter hisbackbone.To beblindto
many things, to be impartial about nothing, to belong always to a
particular side, to hold a strict and necessary point of view in all
matters of values—these are the only conditions under which such a man
can survive at all. But all this is the reverse of, theantagonistof, the truthful man,—of truth.... The believer is not at liberty to
have a conscience for the question “true” and “untrue”: to be upright
onthispoint would mean his immediate downfall. The pathological
limitations of his standpoint convert the convinced man into the
fanatic—Savonarola, Luther Rousseau, Robespierre, Saint-Simon,—these
are the reverse type of the strong spirit that has becomefree.But
the grandiose poses of thesemorbidspirits, of these epileptics
of ideas, exercise an influence over the masses,—fanatics are
picturesque, mankind prefers to look at poses than to listen to reason.55One step further in the psychology of conviction of “faith.” It
is already some time since I first thought of considering whether
convictions were not perhaps more dangerous enemies of truth than lies
(“Human All-too-Human,” Part I, Aphs. 54 and 483). Now I would fain put
the decisive question:is there any difference at all between a lie
and a conviction?—All the world believes that there is, but what in
Heaven’s name does not all the world believe! Every conviction has its
history, its preliminary stages, its period of groping and of mistakes:
it becomes a conviction only after it hasnotbeen one for a long
time, only after it hasscarcelybeen one for a long time. What?
might not falsehood be the embryonic form of conviction?—At times
all that is required is a change of personality: very often what was
a lie in the father becomes a conviction in the son.—I call a lie,
to refuse to see something that one sees, to refuse to see it exactlyasone sees it: whether a lie is perpetrated before witnesses or not
is beside the point.—The most common sort of lie is the one uttered
to one’s self; to lie to others is relatively exceptional. Now this
refusal to see what one sees, this refusal to see a thing exactly as
one sees it, is almost the first condition for all those who belong
to apartyin any sense whatsoever: the man who belongs to a party
perforce becomes a liar. German historians, for instance, are convinced
that Rome stood for despotism, whereas the Teutons introduced the
spirit of freedom into the world: what difference is there between
this conviction and a lie? After this is it to be wondered at, that
all parties, including German historians, instinctively adopt the
grandiloquent phraseology of morality,—that morality almost owes
itssurvivalto the fact that the man who belongs to a party, no
matter what it may be, is in need of morality every moment?—“This
is our conviction: we confess it to the wholeworld, we live and die
for it,—let us respect every thing that has a conviction!”—I have
actually heard antisemites speak in this way. On the contrary, my dear
sirs! An antisemite does not become the least bit more respectable
because he lies on principle.... Priests, who in such matters are
more subtle, and who perfectly understand the objection to which the
idea of a conviction lies open—that is to say of a falsehood which
is perpetrated on principlebecauseit serves a purpose, borrowed
from the Jews the prudent measure of setting the concept “God,” “Will
of God,” “Revelation of God,” at this place. Kant, too, with his
categorical imperative, was on the same road: this was hispracticalreason.—There are some questions in which it isnotgiven to man
to decide between true and false; all the principal questions, all
the principal problems of value, stand beyond human reason.... To
comprehend the limits of reason—this alone is genuine philosophy. For
what purpose did God give man revelation? Would God have done anything
superfluous? Man cannot of his own accord know what is good and what is
evil, that is why God taught man his will.... Moral: the priest doesnotlie, such questions as “truth” or “falseness” have nothing to do
with the things concerning which the priest speaks; such things do not
allow of lying. For, in order to lie, it would be necessary to knowwhatis true in this respect. But that is precisely what man cannot
know: hence the priest is only the mouthpiece of God.—This sort of
sacerdotal syllogism is by no means exclusively Judaic or Christian;
the rightto lie and theprudent measureof “revelation” belongs
to the priestly type, whether of decadent periods or of Pagan times
(—Pagans are all those who say yea to life, and to whom “God” is the
word for the great yea to all things). The “law,” the “will of God,”
the “holy book,” and inspiration.—All these things are merely words
for the conditions under which the priest attains to power, and with
which he maintains his power,—these concepts are to be found at the
base of all sacerdotal organisations, of all priestly or philosophical
and ecclesiastical governments. The “holy lie,” which is common to
Confucius, to the law-book of Manu, to Muhamed, and to the Christian
church, is not even absent in Plato. “Truth is here”; this phrase
means, wherever it is uttered:the priest lies....56After all, the question is, to whatendare falsehoods perpetrated?
The fact that, in Christianity, “holy” ends are entirely absent,
constitutesmyobjection to the means it employs. Its ends are onlybadends: the poisoning, the calumniation and the denial of life,
the contempt of the body, the degradation and self-pollution of man by
virtue of the concept sin,—consequently its means are bad as well.—My
feelings are quite the reverse when I read the law-book ofManu, anincomparably superior and more intellectual work, which it would be
a sin against thespiriteven tomentionin the same breath with
the Bible. You will guess immediately why: it has a genuine philosophy
behind it,init, not merely an evil-smelling Jewish distillation
of Rabbinism andsuperstition,—it gives something to chew even
to the most fastidious psychologist. And,notto forget the most
important point of all, it is fundamentally different from every kind
of Bible: by means of it thenoble classes,the philosophers and the
warriors guard and guide the masses; it is replete with noble values,
it is filled with a feeling of perfection, with a saying of yea to
life, and a triumphant sense of well-being in regard to itself and to
life,—the sun shines upon the whole book.—All those things which
Christianity smothers with its bottomless vulgarity: procreation,
woman, marriage, are here treated with earnestness, with revere nee,
with love and confidence. How can one possibly place in the hands of
children and women, a book that contains those vile words: “to avoid
fornication, let every man have his own wife, and let every woman
have her own husband ... it is better to marry than to burn.”[11]And is it decent to be a Christian so long as the very origin of
man is Christianised,—that is to say, befouled, by the idea of theimmaculata conceptio?... I know of no book in which so many delicate
and kindly things are said to woman, as in the Law-Rook of Manu; these
old grey-beards and saints have a manner of being gallant to women
which, perhaps, cannot be surpassed. “The mouth of a woman,” says Manu
on one occasion, “the breast of a maiden, the prayer of a child, and
the smoke of the sacrifice, are always pure.” Elsewhere he says: “there
is nothing purer than the light of the sun, the shadow cast by a cow,
air, water, fire and the breath of a maiden.” And finally—perhaps this
is also a holy lie:—“all theopenings of the body above the navel are
pure, all those below the navel are impure. Only in a maiden is the
whole body pure.”57The unholiness of Christian means is caughtin flagranti,if only
the end aspired to by Christianity be compared with that of the
Law-Book of Manu; if only these two utterly opposed aims be put under
a strong light The critic of Christianity simply cannot avoid making
Christianitycontemptible.—A Law-Book like that of Manu comes into
being like every good law-book: it epitomises the experience, the
precautionary measures, and the experimental morality of long ages,
it settles things definitely, it no longer creates. The prerequisite
for a codification of this kind, is the recognition of the fact that
the means which procure authority for atruthto which it has cost
both time and great pains to attain, are fundamentally different from
those with which that same truth would be proved. A law-book never
relates the utility, the reasons, the preliminary casuistry, of a
law: for it would be precisely in this way that it would forfeit its
imperative tone, the “thou shalt,” the first condition of its being
obeyed. The problem lies exactly in this.—At a certain stage in the
development of a people, the most far-seeing class within it (that is
to say, the class that sees farthest backwards and forwards), declares
the experience of how its fellow-creatures ought to live—canlive—to be finally settled. Its object is, to reap as rich and as
complete a harvest as possible, in return for the ages of experiment
andterribleexperience it has traversed. Consequently, that whichhas to be avoided, above all, is any further experimentation, the
continuation of the state when values are still fluid, the testing,
choosing, and criticising of valuesin infinitum.Against all this a
double wall is built up: in the first place,Revelation,which is the
assumption that the rationale of every law is not human in its origin,
that it was not sought and found after ages of error, but that it is
divine in its origin, completely and utterly without a history, gift, a
miracle, a mere communication.... And secondly,tradition,which is
the assumption that the law has obtained since the most primeval times,
that it is impious and a crime against one’s ancestors to attempt to
doubt it. The authority of law is established on the principles: Godgaveit, the ancestorslivedit.—The superior reason of such a
procedure lies in the intention to draw consciousness off step by step
from that mode of life which has been recognised as correct (i.e.,
provedafter enormous and carefully examined experience), so that
perfect automatism of the instincts may be attained,—this being the
only possible basis of all mastery of every kind of perfection in
the Art of Life. To draw up a law-book like Manu’s, is tantamount
to granting a people mastership for the future, perfection for the
future,—the right to aspire to the highest Art of Life.To that
end it must be made unconscious;this is the object of every holy
lie.—The order of castes,the highest, the dominating law, is only
the sanction of anatural order,of a natural legislation of the
first rank, over which no arbitrary innovation, no “modern idea” has
any power. Every healthy society falls into three distinct types, which
reciprocallycondition one another and which gravitate differently in
the physiological sense; and each of these has its own hygiene, its
own sphere of work, its own special feeling of perfection, and its
own mastership. It is Nature, not Manu, that separates from the rest,
those individuals preponderating in intellectual power, those excelling
in muscular strength and temperament, and the third class which is
distinguished neither in one way nor the other, the mediocre,—the
latter as the greatest number, the former as theélite.The superior
caste—I call them thefewest,—has, as the perfect caste, the
privileges of the fewest: it devolves upon them to represent happiness,
beauty and goodness on earth. Only the most intellectual men have
the right to beauty, to the beautiful: only in them is goodness not
weakness.Pulchrum est paucorum hominum:goodness is a privilege.
On the other hand there is nothing which they should be more strictly
forbidden than repulsive manners or a pessimistic look, a look that
makes everythingseem ugly,—or even indignation at the general
aspect of things. Indignation is the privilege of the Chandala, and so
is pessimism. “The world is perfect”—that is what the instinct of
the most intellectual says, the yea-saying instinct; “imperfection,
every kind ofinferiorityto us, distance, the pathos of distance,
even the Chandala belongs to this perfection.” The most intellectual
men, as thestrongestfind their happiness where others meet
with their ruin: in the labyrinth, in hardness towards themselves
and others, in endeavour; their delight is self-mastery: with them
asceticism becomes a second nature, a need, aninstinct They regard
a difficult task as their privilege; to play with burdens which crush
their fellows is to them arecreation....Knowledge, a form of
asceticism.—They are the most honourable kind of men: but that does
not prevent them from being the most cheerful and most gracious. They
rule, not because they will, but because theyare;they are not at
liberty to take a second place.—The second in rank are the guardians
of the law, the custodians of order and of security, the noble
warriors, the king, above all, as the highest formula of the warrior,
the judge, and keeper of the law. The second in rank are the executive
of the most intellectual, the nearest to them in duty, relieving them
of all that iscoarsein the work of ruling,—their retinue, their
right hand, their best disciples. In all this, I repeat, there is
nothing arbitrary, nothing “artificial,” that which isotherwiseis
artificial,—by that which is otherwise, nature is put to shame.... The
order of castes, and the order of rank merely formulates the supreme
law of life itself; the differentiation of the three types is necessary
for the maintenance of society, and for enabling higher and highest
types to be reared,—theinequalityof rights is the only condition
of there being rights at all.—A right is a privilege. And in his
way, each has his privilege. Let us not underestimate the privileges
of themediocre.Life always gets harder towards the summit,—the
cold increases, responsibility increases. A high civilisation is a
pyramid: it can stand only upon a broad base, its first prerequisite is
a strongly and soundly consolidated mediocrity. Handicraft, commerce,
agriculture, science, the greater part ofart,—in a word, the whole
range of professional and business callings, is compatible only with
mediocre ability and ambition; such pursuits would be out of place
among exceptions, the instinct pertaining thereto would oppose not
only aristocracy but anarchy as well. The fact that one is publicly
useful, a wheel, a function, presupposes a certain natural destiny: it
is notsociety,but the only kind ofhappinessof which the great
majority are capable, that makes them intelligent machines. For the
mediocre it is a joy to be mediocre; in them mastery in one thing, a
speciality, is a natural instinct. It would be absolutely unworthy of
a profound thinker to see any objection in mediocrityper se.For
in itself it is the first essential condition under which exceptions
are possible; a high culture is determined by it. When the exceptional
man treats the mediocre with more tender care than he does himself or
his equals, this is not mere courtesy of heart on his part—but simply
hisduty.... Whom do I hate most among the rabble of the present
day? The socialistic rabble, the Chandala apostles, who undermine the
working man’s instinct, his happiness and his feeling of contentedness
with his insignificant existence,—who make him envious, and who teach
him revenge. ... The wrong never lies in unequal rights; it lies in the
claim to equal rights. What isbad?But I have already replied to
this: Everything that proceeds from weakness, envy andrevenge.—The
anarchist and the Christian are offspring of the same womb....58In point of fact, it matters greatly to what endone lies: whether one
preserves ordestroysby means of falsehood. It is quite justifiable
to bracket theChristianand theAnarchisttogether: their object,
their instinct, is concerned only with destruction. The proof of this
proposition can be read quite plainly from history: history spells it
with appalling distinctness. Whereas we have just seen a religious
legislation, whose object was to render the highest possible means of
making lifeflourish,and of making a grand organisation of society,
eternal,—Christianity found its mission in putting an end to such an
organisation,precisely because life flourishes through it.In the
one case, the net profit to the credit of reason, acquired through
long ages of experiment and of insecurity, is applied usefully to the
most remote ends, and the harvest, which is as large, as rich and
as complete as possible, is reaped and garnered: in the other case,
on the contrary, the harvest isblightedin a single night That
which stood there,ære perennius,theimperium Romanum,the most
magnificent form of organisation, under difficult conditions, that has
ever been achieved, and compared with which everything that preceded,
and everything which followed it, is mere patchwork, gimcrackery,
and dilettantism,—those holy anarchists made it their “piety,” to
destroy “the world”—that is to say, theimperium Romanum,until
no two stones were left standing one on the other,—until even the
Teutons and other clodhoppers were able to become master of it The
Christian and the anarchist are both decadents; they are both incapable
of acting in any other way than disintegratingly, poisonously and
witheringly,likeblood-suckers;they are both actuated by an
instinct ofmortal hatredof everything that stands erect, that is
great, that is lasting, and that is a guarantee of the future....
Christianity was the vampire of theimperium Romanum,—in a night
it shattered the stupendous achievement of the Romans, which was to
acquire the territory for a vast civilisation which couldbide its
time.—Does no one understand this yet? Theimperium Romanumthat
we know, and which the history of the Roman province teaches us to
know ever more thoroughly, this most admirable work of art on a grand
scale, was the beginning, its construction was calculatedto proveits worth by millenniums,—unto this day nothing has ever again been
built in this fashion, nor have men even dreamt since of building on
this scalesub specie aterni!—This organisation was sufficiently
firm to withstand bad emperors: the accident of personalities must
have nothing to do with such matters—thefirstprinciple of all
great architecture. But it was not sufficiently firm to resist thecorruptestform of corruption, to resist the Christians.... These
stealthy canker-worms, which under the shadow of night, mist and
duplicity, insinuated themselves into the company of every individual,
and proceeded to drain him of all seriousness forrealthings,
of all his instinct forrealities;this cowardly, effeminate and
sugary gang have step by step alienated all “souls” from this colossal
edifice,—those valuable, virile and noble natures who felt that
the cause of Rome was their own personal cause, their own personal
seriousness, their own personalpride.The stealth of the bigot,
thesecrecy of the conventicle, concepts as black as hell such as
the sacrifice of the innocent, theunto mysticain the drinking
of blood, above all the slowly kindled fire of revenge, of Chandala
revenge—such things became master of Rome, the same kind of religion
on the pre-existent form of which Epicurus had waged war. One has
only to read Lucretius in order to understand what Epicurus combated,notPaganism, but “Christianity,” that is to say the corruption of
souls through the concept of guilt, through the concept of punishment
and immortality. He combated thesubterraneancults, the whole of
latent Christianity—to deny immortality was at that time a genuinedeliverance.—And Epicurus had triumphed, every respectable thinker
in the Roman Empire was an Epicurean:then St Paul appeared... St
Paul, the Chandala hatred against Rome, against “the world,” the Jew,
the eternal Jewpar excellence,become flesh and genius. ... What
he divined was, how, by the help of the small sectarian Christian
movement, independent of Judaism, a universal conflagration could be
kindled; how, with the symbol of the “God on the Cross,” everything
submerged, everything secretly insurrectionary, the whole offspring
of anarchical intrigues could be gathered together to constitute an
enormous power. “For salvation is of the Jews.”—Christianity is
the formula for the supersession,andepitomising of all kinds of
subterranean cults, that of Osiris, of the Great Mother, of Mithras for
example: St Paul’s genius consisted in his discovery of this. In this
matter his instinct was so certain, that, regardless of doing violence
to truth, he laid theideas by means of which those Chandala religions
fascinated, upon the very lips of the “Saviour” he had invented, and
not only upon his lips,—that hemadeout of him something which even
a Mithras priest could understand.... This was his moment of Damascus:
he saw that he hadneed ofthe belief in immortality in order to
depreciate “the world,” that the notion of “hell” would become master
of Rome, that with a “Beyond”this lifecan be killed. ... Nihilist
and Christian,—they rhyme in German, and they do not only rhyme.59The whole labour of the ancient worldin vain:I am at a loss for a
word which could express my feelings at something so atrocious.—And
in view of the fact that its labour was only preparatory, that with
adamantine self-consciousness it laid the substructure, alone, to
a work which was to last millenniums, the wholesignificanceof
the ancient world was certainly in vain!... What was the use of the
Greeks? what was the use of the Romans?—All the prerequisites of a
learned culture, all the scientific methods already existed, the great
and peerless art of reading well had already been established—that
indispensable condition to tradition, to culture and to scientific
unity; natural science hand in hand with mathematics and mechanics
was on the best possible road,—the sense for facts, the last and
most valuable of all senses, had its schools, and its tradition was
already centuries old! Is this understood? Everythingessentialhad
been discovered to make it possiblefor work to be begun:—methods,
and this cannot be said too often, are the essential thing, also the
most difficult thing, while they moreover have to wage the longest war
against custom and indolence. That which to-day we have successfully
reconquered for ourselves, by dint of unspeakable self-discipline—for
in some way or other all of us still have the bad instincts, the
Christian instincts, in our body,—the impartial eye for reality,
the cautious hand, patience and seriousness in the smallest details,
completeuprightnessin knowledge,—all this was already there; it
had been there over two thousand years before! And in addition to this
there was also that excellent and subtle tact and taste!Notin the
form of brain drilling!Notin the form of “German” culture with the
manners of a boor! But incarnate, manifesting itself in men’s bearing
and in their instinct,—in short constituting reality....All this
in vain!In one night it became merely a memory!—The Greeks! The
Romans! Instinctive nobility, instinctive taste, methodic research,
the genius of organisation and administration, faith, thewillto
the future of mankind, the greatyeato all things materialised
in theimperium Romanum,become visible to all the senses, grand
style no longer manifested in mere art, but in reality, in truth,
inlife.—And buried in a night, not by a natural catastrophe!
Not stamped to death by Teutons and other heavy-footed vandals!
But destroyed by crafty, stealthy, invisible anæmic vampires! Not
conquered,—but only drained of blood!... The concealed lust of
revenge, miserable envybecomemaster!Everything wretched, inwardly
ailing, and full of ignoble feelings, the whole Ghetto-world of souls,
was in a triceuppermost!—One only needs to read any one of the
Christian agitators—St Augustine, for instance,—in order to realise,
in order tosmell,what filthy fellows came to the top in this
movement. You would deceive yourselves utterly if you supposed that the
leaders of the Christian agitation showed any lack of understanding
—Ah! they were shrewd, shrewd to the point of holiness were these
dear old Fathers of the Church I What they lack is something quite
different. Nature neglected them,—it forgot to give them a modest
dowry of decent, of respectable and ofcleanlyinstincts.... Between
ourselves, they are not even men. If Islam despises Christianity, it is
justified a thousand times over; for Islam presupposes men.60Christianity destroyed the harvest we might have reaped from the
culture of antiquity, later it also destroyed our harvest of the
culture of Islam. The wonderful Moorish world of Spanish culture, which
in its essence is more closely related tous,and which appeals
more to our sense and taste than Rome and Greece, wastrampled to
death(—I do not say by what kind of feet), why?—because it owed
its origin to noble, to manly instincts, because it said yea to life,
even that life so full of the rare and refined luxuries of the Moors!
... Later on the Crusaders waged war upon something before which it
would have been more seemly in them togrovel in the dust,—a culture,
beside which even our Nineteenth Century would seem very poor and
very “senile.”—Of course they wanted booty: the Orient was rich....
For goodness’ sake let us forget our prejudices! Crusades—superior
piracy, that is all! German nobility—that is to say, a Viking nobility
at bottom, was in its element in such wars: the Church was only too
well aware of how German nobility is to be won.... German nobility
was always the “Swiss Guard” of the Church, always at the service of
all the bad instincts of the Church; but it waswell paid for it
all....Fancy the Church having waged its deadly war upon everything
noble on earth, precisely with the help of German swords, German blood
and courage! A host of painfulquestionsmight be raised on this
point German nobility scarcely takes a place in the history of higher
culture: the reason of this is obvious; Christianity, alcohol—the twogreatmeans of corruption. As a matter of fact choice ought to be
just as much out of the question between Islam and Christianity, as
between an Arab and a Jew. The decision is already self-evident; nobody
is at liberty to exercise a choice in this matter. A man is either of
the Chandala or he isnot ...“War with Rome to the knife! Peace
and friendship with Islam”: this is what that great free spirit, that
genius among German emperors,—Frederick the Second, not only felt
but alsodid.What? Must a German in the first place be a genius, a
free-spirit, in order to havedecentfeelings? I cannot understand
how a German was ever able to haveChristianfeelings.61Here it is necessary to revive a memory which will be a hundred times
more painful to Germans. The Germans have destroyed the last great
harvest of culture which was to be garnered for Europe,—it destroyed
theRenaissance.Does anybody at last understand,willanybody
understand what the Renaissance was?The transvaluation of Christian
values,the attempt undertaken with all means, all instincts and all
genius to make theoppositevalues, thenoblevalues triumph,...
Hitherto there has been onlythisgreat war: there has never yet
been a more decisive question than the Renaissance,—myquestion
is the question of the Renaissance:—there has never been a more
fundamental, a more direct and a more severeattack,delivered with
a whole front upon the centre of the foe. To attack at the decisive
quarter, at the very seat of Christianity, and there to placenoblevalues on the throne,—that is to say, tointroducethem into the
instincts, into the most fundamental needs and desires of those
sitting there.... I see before me a possibility perfectly magic in
its charm and glorious colouring—it seems to me to scintillate
with all the quivering grandeur of refined beauty, that there is
an art at work within it which is so divine, so infernally divine,
that one might seek through millenniums in vain for another such
possibility; I see a spectacle so rich in meaning and so wonderfully
paradoxical to boot, that it would be enough to make all the gods of
Olympus rock with immortal laughter,—Cæsar Borgia as Pope....
Do you understand me?... Very well then, this would have been the
triumph which I alone am longing for to-day:—this would havesweptChristianityaway!—What happened? A German monk, Luther, came to
Rome. This monk, with all the vindictive instincts of an abortive
priest in his body, foamed with rage over the Renaissance in Rome....
Instead of, with the profoundest gratitude, understanding the vast
miracle that had taken place, the overcoming of Christianity at itsheadquarters,—the fire of his hate knew only how to draw fresh fuel
from this spectacle. A religious man thinks only of himself.—Luther
saw the corruption of the Papacy when the very reverse stared him in
the face: the old corruption, thepeceatum originate,Christianitynolonger sat upon the Papal chair! But Life! The triumph of
Life! The great yea to all lofty, beautiful and daring things!...
And Luther reinstated the Church; he attacked it The Renaissance
thus became an event without meaning, a greatin vain!—Ah these
Germans, what have they not cost us already! In vain—this has always
been the achievement of the Germans.—The Reformation, Leibniz,
Kant and so-called German philosophy, the Wars of Liberation, the
Empire—in each case are in vain for something which had already
existed, for something whichcannot be recovered.... I confess it,
these Germans are my enemies: I despise every sort of uncleanliness
in concepts and valuations in them, every kind of cowardice in the
face of every honest yea or nay. For almost one thousand years, now,
they have tangled and confused everything they have laid their hands
on; they have on theirconscience all the half-measures, all the
three-eighth measures of which Europe is sick; they also have the
most unclean, the most incurable, and the most irrefutable kind of
Christianity—Protestantism—on their conscience.... If we shall never
be able to get rid of Christianity, theGermanswill be to blame.62—With this I will now conclude and pronounce my judgment. IcondemnChristianity and confront it with the most terrible accusation that
an accuser has ever had in his mouth. To my mind it is the greatest
of all conceivable corruptions, it has had the will to the last
imaginable corruption. The Christian Church allowed nothing to escape
from its corruption; it converted every value into its opposite, every
truth into a He, and every honest impulse into an ignominy of the
soul. Let anyone dare to speak to me of its humanitarian blessings!
Toabolishany sort of distress was opposed to its profoundest
interests; its very existence depended on states of distress; it
created states of distress in order to make itself immortal.... The
cancer germ of sin, for instance: the Church was the first to enrich
mankind with this misery!—The “equality of souls before God,” this
falsehood, thispretextfor therancunesof all the base-minded,
this anarchist bomb of a concept, which has ultimately become the
revolution, the modern idea, the principle of decay of the whole of
social order,—this isChristiandynamite ... The “humanitarian”
blessings of Christianity! To breed a self-contradiction, an art of
self-profanation, a will to lie at any price, an aversion,a contempt
of all good and honest instincts out ofhumanitas!Is this what you
call the blessings of Christianity?—Parasitism as the only method of
the Church; sucking all the blood, all the love, all the hope of life
out of mankind with anæmic and sacred ideals. A “Beyond” as the will to
deny all reality; the cross as the trade-mark of the most subterranean
form of conspiracy that has ever existed,—against health, beauty,
well-constitutedness, bravery, intellect, kindliness of soul,against
Life itself....This eternal accusation against Christianity I would fain write on all
walls, wherever there are walls,—I have letters with which I can make
even the blind see.... I call Christianity the one great curse, the one
enormous and innermost perversion, the one great instinct of revenge,
for which no means are too venomous, too underhand, too underground and
toopetty,—I call it the one immortal blemish of mankind....Andtimeis reckoned from thedies nefastusupon which this
fatality came into being—from the first day of Christianity!—why
not rather from its last day?—From to-day?—Transvaluation of all
Values!...