[1]The German “Tüchtigkeit” has a nobler ring than our word
“efficiency.”—TR.[2]Cf.Disraeli: “But enlightened Europe is not happy.
Its existence is a fever which it calls progress. Progress to what?”
(“Tancred,” Book III., Chap, vii.).—TR.[3]It will be seen from this that in spite of Nietzsche’s
ruthless criticism of the priests, he draws a sharp distinction between
Christianity and the Church. As the latter still contained elements
of order, it was more to his taste than the denial of authority
characteristic of real Christianity.—TR.[4]“reine Thorheit” in the German text, referring once
again to Parsifal.—Tr.[5]This applies apparently to Bismarck, the forger of the Ems
telegram and a sincere Christian.—Tr.[6]An adaptation of Shakespeare’s “Well roared, lion” (Mid.
N. D.,Act 5, Sc. i.), the lion, as is well known, being the symbol
for St Mark in Christian literature and Art—TR.[7]A parody on a line in Schiller’s“Jungfrau von Orleans”(Act 3, Sc. vi.): “Mit der Dummheit kämpfen Götter selbst vergebens.”
(With stupidity even the gods themselves struggle in vain).—TR.[8]ἒφεξις = Lat. Retentio, Inhibitio (Stephanus, Thesaurus
Græcæ Linguæ); therefore: reserve, caution. The Greek Sceptics were
also called Ephectics owing to their caution in judging and in
concluding from facts.—TR.[9]The following passage from Multatuti will throw light on
this passage:—“Father:—‘Behold, my son, how wisely Providence has arranged
everything! This bird lays its eggs in its nest and the young will be
hatched just about the time when there will be worms and flies with
which to feed them. Then they will sing a song of praise in honour of
the Creator who overwhelms his creatures with blessings.’—”Son:—‘Will the worms join in the song, Dad?’“.—TR.[10]“Thus Spake Zarathustra.” The Priests.—TR.[11]I Corinthians vii. 2, 9.—TR.THE ETERNAL RECURRENCEANDEXPLANATORY NOTES TO “THUS SPAKE ZARATHUSTRA.”TRANSLATOR’S PREFACEThe notes concerning the Eternal Recurrence, in this volume, are said
by Mrs Foerster-Nietzsche to have been the first that Nietzsche ever
wrote on the subject of his great doctrine. This being so, they must
have been composed towards the autumn of the year 1881.I have already pointed out elsewhere (Will to Power,vol. ii.,
Translator’s Preface) how much importance Nietzsche himself ascribed
to this doctrine, and how, until the end, he regarded it as the
inspiration which had led to his chief work,Thus Spake Zarathustra.For the details relating to its inception, however, I would refer the
reader to Mrs Foerster-Nietzsche’s Introduction to her brother’s chief
work, which was translated for the eleventh volume of this Edition of
the Complete Works.In reading these notes it would be well to refer to Nietzsche’s other
utterances on the subject which are to be found at the end of vol.
ii. of theWill to Power,and also, if possible, to have recourse
to the original German text. Despite the greatest care, I confess
that in some instances, I have felt a little doubt as to the precise
English equivalent for the thoughts expressed under the headingEternal Recurrence;and, though I have attributed this difficulty to
the extreme novelty of the manner in which thesubject is presented,
it is well that the reader should be aware that such doubt has been
entertained. For I disbelieve utterly in mere verbal translation,
however accurate, and would question anybody’s right to convert a
German sentence into English—even though he were so perfect in
both languages as to be almost absolutely bilingual,—if he did not
completely grasp the thought behind the sentence.The writing of the collected Explanatory Notes toThus Spake
Zarathustra, cannot be given any exact date. Some of them consist of
comments, written down by Nietzsche after the completion of the book,
and kept as the nucleus of an actual commentary to Zarathustra, which
it seems to have been his intention, one day, to write; while others
are merely memoranda and rough sketches, probably written before the
completion of the work, and which served the purpose of a draft of his
original plan. The reader who knowsThus Spake Zarathustrawill be
able to tell wherein the book ultimately differed from the plan visible
in these preliminary notes.As an authoritative, though alas! all too fragmentary elucidation of a
few of the more obscure passages of Zarathustra, some of these notes
are of the greatest value; and, in paragraph 73, for instance, there
is an interpretation of the Fourth and Last Part, which I myself would
have welcomed with great enthusiasm, at the time when I was having my
first struggles with the spirit of this great German sage’s life work.ANTHONY M. LUDOVICI.I. ETERNAL RECURRENCE1. THE DOCTRINE EXPOUNDED AND SUBSTANTIATED.1.The extent of universal energy is limited; it is not “infinite”: we
should beware of such excesses in our concepts! Consequently the number
of states, changes, combinations, and evolutions of this energy,
although it may be enormous and practically incalculable, is at any
rate definite and not unlimited. The time, however, in which this
universal energy works its changes is infinite—that is to say, energy
remains eternally the same and is eternally active:—at this moment an
infinity has already elapsed, that is to say, every possible evolution
must already have taken place. Consequently the present process of
evolution must be a repetition, as was also the one before it, as will
also be the one which will follow. And so on forwards and backwards!
Inasmuch as the entire state of all forces continually returns,
everything has existed an infinite number of times. Whether, apart from
this, anything exactly like something that formerly existed has ever
appeared, is completely beyond proof. It would seem that each complete
state of energy forms all qualities afresh even to the smallest
degree, so that two different complete states could have nothing in
common.Is it to be supposed that in one and the same complete states
two precisely similar things could appear—for instance two leaves?
I doubt it: it would take for granted that they had both had an
absolutely similar origin, and in that case we should have to assume
that right back in infinity two similar things had also existed despite
all the changes in the complete states and their creation of new
qualities—an impossible assumption.2Formerly it was thought that unlimited energy was a necessary corollary
to unlimited activity in time, and that this energy could be exhausted
by no form of consumption. Now it is thought that energy remains
constant and docs not require to be infinite. It is eternally active
but it is no longer able eternally to create new forms, it must repeat
itself: that is my conclusion.3An incalculable number of complete states of energy have existed,
but these have not been infinitely different: for if they had been,
unlimited energy would have been necessary. The energy of the universe
can only have a given number of possible qualities.4The endless evolution of new forms is a contradiction, for it would
imply eternally increasing energy. But whence would it grow? Whence
would it derive its nourishment and its surplus of nourishment?The
assumption that the universe is an organism contradicts the very
essence of the organic.5In what principle and belief is that decisive turning point in
philosophical thought best expressed which has come into being thanks
to the preponderance of the scientific spirit over the religious and
God-creating one? We insist upon the fact that the world as a sum of
energy must not be regarded as unlimited—we forbid ourselves the
concept infinite energy, because it seems incompatible with the concept
energy.6An unlimited number of new changes and states on the part of limited
energy is a contradiction, however extensive one may imagine it to be,
and however economical the changes may be, provided it is infinite.
We are therefore forced to conclude: (1) either that the universe
began its activity at a given moment of time and will end in a similar
fashion,—but the beginning of activity is absurd; if a state of
equilibrium had been reached it would have persisted to all eternity;
(2) Or there is no such thing as an endless number of changes, but
a circle consisting of a definite number of them which continually
recurs: activity is eternal, the number of the products and states of
energy is limited.7If all the possible combinations and relations of forces had not
already been exhausted, then an infinity would not yet lie behind
us. Now sinceinfinite time must be assumed, no fresh possibility
can exist and everything must have appeared already, and moreover an
infinite number of times.8The present world of forces leads back to a state of greatest
simplicity in these forces: it likewise leads forwards to such a
state,—cannot and must notbothstates be identical? No incalculable
number of states can evolve out of a system of limited forces, that
is to say, out of a given quantity of energy which may be precisely
measured. Only when we falsely assume that space is unlimited, and that
therefore energy gradually becomes dissipated, can the final state be
an unproductive and lifeless one.9First principles.—The last physical state of energy which we can
imagine must necessarily be the first also. The absorption of energy
in latent energy must be the cause of the production of the most vital
energy. For a highly positive state must follow a negative state Space
like matter is a subjective form, time is not. The notion of space
first arose from the assumption that space could be empty. But there is
no such thing as empty space. Everything is energy.We cannot think of that which moves and that which is moved together,
but both these things constitute matter and space. We isolate.10Concerning the resurrection of the world.—Outof two negatives, when
they are forces, a positive arises. (Darkness comes of light opposed to
light, cold arises from warmth opposed to warmth, &c., &c.)11An uncertain state of equilibrium occurs just as seldom in nature as
two absolutely equal triangles. Consequently anything like a static
state of energy in general is impossible. If stability were possible it
would already have been reached.12Either complete equilibrium must in itself be an impossibility, or
the changes of energy introduce themselves in the circular process
before that equilibrium which is in itself possible has appeared.—But
it would be madness to ascribe a feeling of self-preservation to
existence! And the same applies to the conception of a contest of pain
and pleasure among atoms.13Physics supposes that energy may be divided up: but every one of its
possibilities must first be adjusted to reality. There can therefore
be no question of dividing energy into equal parts; in every one of
its states it manifests a certain quality, and qualities cannot be
subdivided: hence a state of equilibrium in energy is impossible.14If energy had ever reached a stage of equilibrium that stage would
have persisted: it has thereforenever reached such a stage. The
present condition of things contradicts this assumption. If we assume
that there has ever been a state absolutely like the present one this
assumption is in no wise refuted by the present state. For, among
all the endless possibilities, this case must already have occurred,
as an infinity is already behind us. If equilibrium were possible it
would already have been reached.—And if this momentary state has
already existed then that which bore it and the previous one also would
likewise have existed and so on backwards,—and from this it follows
that it has already existed not only twice but three times,—just as it
will exist again not only twice but three times,—in fact an infinite
number of times backwards and forwards. That is to say, the whole
process of Becoming consists of a repetition of a definite number of
precisely similar states.—Clearly the human brain cannot be left to
imagine the whole series of possibilities: but in any case, quite apart
from our ability to judge or our inability to conceive the whole range
of possibilities, the present state at least is a possible one—because
it is a real one. We should therefore say: in the event of the number
of possibilities not being infinite, and assuming that in the course of
unlimited time a limited number of these must appear, all real states
must have been preceded by similar states? Because from every given
moment a whole infinity is to be calculated backwards? The stability of
forces and their equilibrium is a possible alternative: but it has not
been reached; consequently the number of possibilities is greater than
the number of real states. The fact that nothing similar recurs couldnot be explained by appealing to accident, but only by supposing that a
certain intention, that no similar things should recur, were actually
inherent in the essence of energy: for, if we grant that the number of
cases is enormous, the occurrence of like cases is more probable than
absolute disparity.15Let us think backwards a moment If the world had a goal, this goal
must have been reached: if a certain (unintentional) final state
existed for the world, this state also would have been reached. If
it were in any way capable of a stationary or stable condition, and
if in the whole course of its existence only one second of Being, in
the strict sense of the word, had been possible, then there could
no longer be such a process as evolution, and therefore no thinking
and no observing of such a process. If on the other hand the world
were something which continually renovated itself, it would then be
understood to be something miraculous and free to create itself—in
fact something divine. Eternal renovation presupposes that energy
voluntarily increases itself, that it not only has the intention, but
also the power, to avoid repeating itself or to avoid returning into a
previous form, and that every instant it adjusts itself in every one of
its movements to prevent such a contingency,—or that it was incapable
of returning to a state it had already passed through. That would
mean that the whole sum of energy was not constant, any more than its
attributes were But a sum of energy which would be inconstant and which
would fluctuate is quite unthinkable Let us not indulgeour fancy
any longer with unthinkable things in order to fall once more before
the concept of a Creator (multiplication out of nothing, reduction
out of nothing, absolute arbitrariness and freedom in growth and in
qualities):—16He who does not believe in the circular process of the universe must
pin his faith to an arbitrary God—thus my doctrine becomes necessary
as opposed to all that has been said hitherto in matters of Theism.17The hypothesis which I would oppose to that of the eternal circular
process:—Would it be just as possible to explain the laws of the
mechanical world as exceptions and seemingly as accidents among the
things of the universe, as one possibility only among an incalculable
number of possibilities? Would it be possible to regard ourselves
as accidentally thrust into this corner of the mechanical universal
arrangement?—That all chemical philosophy is likewise an exception
and an accident in the world’s economy, and finally that organic life
is a mere exception and accident in the chemical world? Should we have
to assume as the most general form of existence a world which was
not yet mechanical, which was outside all mechanical laws (although
accessible to them)?—and that as a matter of fact this world would
be the most general now and for evermore, so that the origin of the
mechanical world would be a lawless game which would ultimately acquire
such consistency as the organic laws seem to have nowfrom our point
of view? So that all our mechanical laws would be not eternal, but
evolved, and would have survived innumerable different mechanical
laws, or that they had attained supremacy in isolated corners of the
world and not in others?—It would seem that we need caprice, actual
lawlessness, and only a capacity for law, a primeval state of stupidity
which is not even able to concern itself with mechanics? The origin of
qualities presupposes the existence of quantities, and these, for their
part, might arise from a thousand kinds of mechanical processes.Is not the existence of some sort of irregularity and incomplete
circular form in the world about us, a sufficient refutation of
the regular circularity of everything that exists? Whence comes
this variety within the circular process? Is not everything far too
complicated to have been the outcome of unity? And are not the many
chemical laws and likewise the organic species and forms inexplicable
as the result of homogeneity? or of duality?—Supposing there were
such a thing as a regular contracting energy in all the centres of
force in the universe, the question would be, whence could the most
insignificant difference spring? For then the whole world would have
to be resolved into innumerable completely equal rings and spheres of
existence and we should have an incalculable number of exactly equal
worlds side by side. Is it necessary for me to assume this? Must I
suppose that an eternal sequence of like worlds also involves eternal
juxta-position of like worlds? But the multifariousness and disorder
in the world which we have knownhitherto contradicts this; no such
universal similarity has existed in evolution, for in that case even
for our part of the cosmos a regular spherical form must have been
formed. Should the production of qualities not be subject to any strict
laws? Can it be possible that different things have been derived from
“energy”? Arbitrarily? Is the conformity to law which we observe
perhaps only a deception? Is it possible that it is not a primeval law?
Is it possible that the multifariousness of qualities even in our part
of the world is the result of the absolute occurrence of arbitrary
characteristics? But that these characteristics no longer appear in our
corner of the globe? Or that our corner of existence has adopted a rule
which we call cause and effect when all the while it is no such thing
(an arbitrary phenomenon become a rule, as for instance oxygen and
hydrogen in chemistry)??? Is this rule simply a protracted kind of mood?18If the universe had been able to become an organism it would have
become one already.Asa whole we must try and regard it in the
light of a thingasremoteas possiblefrom the organic. I believe
that even our chemical affinity and coherence may be perhaps recently
evolved and that these appearances only occur in certain corners of
the universe at certain epochs. Let us believe in absolute necessity
in the universe but let us guard against postulating any sort of law,
even if it be a primitive and mechanical one of our own experience,
as ruling over the whole and constituting one of its eternalcharacteristics.—All chemical qualities might have been evolved and
might disappear and return. Innumerable characteristics might have been
developed which for us,—from our limited point of view in time and
space, defy observation. The transformation of a chemical quality may
perhaps now be taking place, but so slowly that it escapes our most
delicate calculations.19Inorganic matter, even though in most cases it may once have
been organic, can have stored up no experience,—it is always
without a pastl If the reverse were the case a repetition would be
impossible—for then matter would for ever be producing new qualities
with new pasts.20We must guard against ascribing any aspiration or any goal to this
circular process: Likewise we must not, from the point of view of our
own needs, regard it as either monotonous or foolish, &c. We may grant
that the greatest possible irrationality, as also its reverse, may be
an essential feature of it: but we must not value it according to this
hypothesis. Rationality or irrationality cannot stand as attributes of
the universe.—We must not think of the law of this circular process as
a thing evolved, by drawing false analogies with the circular motions
occurringwithinthe circle. There was no primitive chaos followed
gradually by a more harmonious and finally definite circular motion of
all forces: On the contrary everything is eternal and unevolved. If
there ever was a chaos of forces, then that chaositself was eternal
and was repeated at its particular moment of time in the turn of the
world wheel. The circular process is not the outcome of evolution, it
is a primitive principle like the quantum of energy, and allows of no
exception or violation. All Becoming takes place within the circular
process and the quantum of energy which constitutes it: therefore we
must not apply ephemeral processes like those for instance of heavenly
bodies, of the ebb and flow of tides, of day and night, of the seasons,
to the drawing of analogies for characterising the eternal circular
process.21The “chaos of the universe,” inasmuch as it excludes any aspiration to
a goal, does not oppose the thought of the circular process: the latter
is simply an irrational necessity, absolutely free from any formal
ethical or æsthetical significance. Arbitrariness in small things as in
great is completely lacking here.22Let us guard against believing that the universe has a tendency to
attain to certain forms, or that it aims at becoming more beautiful,
more perfect, more complicated! All that is anthropomorphism! Anarchy,
ugliness, form—are unrelated concepts. There is no such thing as
imperfection in the realm of mechanics.Everything has returned: Sirius, and the spider, and thy thoughts at
this moment, and this last thought of thine that all these things will
return.23Our whole world consists of the ashes of an incalculable number of
living creatures: and even if living matter is ever so little compared
with the whole, everything has already been transformed into life once
before and thus the process goes on. If we grant eternal time we must
assume the eternal change of matter.24Whoever thou mayest be, beloved stranger, whom I meet here for the
first time, avail thyself of this happy hour and of the stillness
around us, and above us, and let me tell thee something of the thought
which has suddenly risen before me like a star which would fain shed
down its rays upon thee and every one, as befits the nature of light—25The world of energy suffers no diminution: otherwise with eternal
time it would have grown weak and finally have perished altogether.
The world of energy suffers no stationary state, otherwise this would
already have been reached, and the clock of the universe would be at
a standstill. The world of energy does not therefore reach a state of
equilibrium; for no instant in its career has it had rest; its energy
and its movement have been the same for all time. Whatever state this
world could have reached must ere now have been attained, and not
only once but an incalculable number of times. This applies to this
very moment It has already been here once before, and several times,
and will recurin the same way, with all forces distributed as they
are to-day: and the same holds good of the moment of time which bore
the present and of that which shall be the child of the present.
Fellow-man! Your whole life, like a sandglass, will always be reversed
and will ever run out again,—a long minute of time will elapse until
all those conditions out of which you were evolved return in the wheel
of the cosmic process. And then you will find every pain and every
pleasure, every friend and every enemy, every hope and every error,
every blade of grass and every ray of sunshine once more, and the whole
fabric of things that makes up your life. This ring in which you are
but a grain will glitter afresh for ever. And in every one of these
cycles of human life there will be one hour where for the first time
one man, and then many, will perceive the mighty thought of the eternal
recurrence of all things:—and for mankind this is always the hour of
Noon.2. THE EFFECTS OF THE DOCTRINE UPON MANKIND26How can we give weight to our inner life without making it evil and
fanatical towards people who think otherwise. Religious belief is
declining and man is beginning to regard himself as ephemeral and
unessential, a point of view which is making him weak; he does not
exercise so much effort in striving or enduring. What he wants is
momentary enjoyment He would make things light for himself,—and a good
deal of his spirit gets squandered in this endeavour.27The political mania at which I smile just as merrily as my
contemporaries smile at the religious mania of former times is above
all Materialism, a belief in the world, and in the repudiation of a
“Beyond,” of a “back-world.” The object of those who believe in the
latter is the well-being of the ephemeral individual: that is why
Socialism is its fruit; for with Socialism ephemeral individuals wish
to secure their happiness by means of socialisation. They have no
reason to wait, as those men had who believed in eternal souls, in
eternal development and eternal amelioration. My doctrine is: Live
so that thou mayest desire to live again,—that is thy duty,—for in
any case thou wilt live again He unto whom striving is the greatest
happiness, let him strive; he unto whom peace is the greatest
happiness, let him rest; he unto whom subordination, following,
obedience, is the greatest happiness, let him obey. All that is
necessary is that he should know what it is that gives him the highest
happiness, and to fight shy of no means! Eternity is at stake!28“But if everything is necessary, what control have I over my actions?”
Thought and faith are a form of ballast which burden thee in addition
to other burdens thou mayest have, and which are even more weighty than
the latter. Sayest thou that nutrition, the land of thy birth, air, and
society change thee and determine thee? Well, thy opinions do this to
a much greater degree, for they even prescribethy nourishment, thy
land of adoption, thy atmosphere, and thy society for thee.—If thou
ever assimilatest the thought of thoughts it will also alter thee. The
question which thou wilt have to answer before every deed that thou
doest: “is this such a deed as I am prepared to perform an incalculable
number of times?” is the best ballast.29The mightiest of all thoughts absorbs a good deal of energy which
formerly stood at the disposal of other aspirations, and in this way
it exercises a modifying influence; it creates new laws of motion in
energy, though no new energy. But it is precisely in this respect that
there lies some possibility of determining new emotions and new desires
in men.30Let us try and discover how the thought that something gets repeated
has affected mankind hitherto (the year, for instance, or periodical
illnesses, waking and sleeping, &). Even supposing the recurrence of
the cycle is only a probability or a possibility, even a thought, even
a possibility, can shatter us and transform us. It is not only feelings
and definite expectations that do this! See what effect the thought of
eternal damnation has had!31From the moment when this thought begins to prevail all colours will
change their hue and a new history will begin.32The history of the future: this thought will tend to triumph ever more
and more, and those who disbelieve in it will be forced, according to
their nature, ultimately to die out.He, alone, who will regard his existence as capable of eternal
recurrence will remain over: but among such as these a state will be
possible of which the imagination of no utopist has ever dreamt!33Ye fancy that ye will have a long rest ere your second birth takes
place,—but do not deceive yourselves! ’Twixt your last moment of
consciousness and the first ray of the dawn of your new life no time
will elapse,—as a flash of lightning will the space go by, even though
living creatures think it is billions of years, and are not even able
to reckon it. Timelessness and immediate re-birth are compatible, once
intellect is eliminated!34Thou feelest that thou must soon take thy leave perhaps—and the sunset
glow of this feeling pierces through thy happiness. Give heed to this
sign: it means that thou lovest life and thyself, and life as it has
hitherto affected thee and moulded thee,—and that thou cravest for its
eternity—Non alia sed hac vita sempiterna!Know also, that transiency singeth its short song for ever afresh and
that at the sound of the first verse thou wilt almost die of longing
when thou thinkest that it might be for the last time.35Let us stamp the impress of eternity upon our lives! This thought
contains more than all the religions which taught us to contemn this
life as a thing ephemeral, which bade us squint upwards to another and
indefinite existence.—36We must not strive after distant and unknown states of bliss and
blessings and acts of grace, but we must live so that we would fain
live again and live for ever so, to all eternity!—Our duty is present
with us every instant.37The leading tendencies: (1) We must implant the love of life, the
love of every man’s own life in every conceivable way! However each
individual may understand this love of self his neighbour will
acquiesce, and will have to learn great tolerance towards it: however
much it may often run counter to his taste,—provided the individual in
question really helps to increase his joy in his own life!(2) We must all be one in our hostility towards everything and
everybody who tends to cast a slur upon the value of life: towards
all gloomy, dissatisfied and brooding natures. We must prevent these
from procreating! But our hostility itself must be a means to our joy!
Thus we shall laugh; we shall mock and we shall exterminate without
bitterness I Let this be our mortal combatThis life is thy eternal life!38What was the cause of the downfall of the Alexandrian culture? With all
its useful discoveries and its desire to investigate the nature of this
world, it did not know how to lend this life its ultimate importance,
the thought of a Beyond was more important to it! To teach anew in
this regard is still the most important thing of all:—perhaps if
metaphysics are applied to this life in the most emphatic way,—as in
the case of my doctrine!39This doctrine is lenient towards those who do not believe in it It
speaks of no hells and it contains no threats. He who does not believe
in it has but a fleeting life in his consciousness.40It would be terrible if we still believed in sin, but whatever we may
do, however often we may repeat it, it is all innocent. If the thought
of the eternal recurrence of all things does not overwhelm thee, then
it is not thy fault: and if it does overwhelm thee, this does not stand
to thy merit either.—We think more leniently of our forebears than
they themselves thought of themselves; we mourn over the errors which
were to them constitutional; but we do not mourn over their evil.41Let us guard against teaching such a doctrine as if it were a suddenly
discovered religion! Itmust percolate through slowly, and whole
generations must build on it and become fruitful through it,—in order
that it may grow into a large tree which will shelter all posterity.
What are the two thousand years in which Christianity has maintained
its sway? For the mightiest thought of all many millenniums will be
necessary,—long, long, long will it have to remain puny and weak!42For this thought we do not require thirty years of glory with drums
and fifes, and thirty years of grave-digging followed by an eternity
of macaberesque stillness, as is the case with so many other famous
thoughts.Simple and well-nigh arid as it is, this thought must not even require
eloquence to uphold it.43Are ye now prepared? Ye must have experienced every form of
scepticism and ye must have wallowed with voluptuousness in ice-cold
baths,—otherwise ye have no right to this thought; I wish to protect
myself against those who are over-ready to believe, likewise against
those who gush over anything! I would defend my doctrine in advance.
It must be the religion of the freest, most cheerful and most sublime
souls, a delightful pastureland somewhere between golden ice and a pure
heaven!EXPLANATORY NOTES TO “THUS SPAKE ZARATHUSTRA”1All goals have been annihilated: valuations are turning against each
other:People call him good who hearkens to the dictates of his own heart, but
they also call him good who merely does his duty;People call the mild and conciliating man good, but they also call him
good who is brave, inflexible and severe;People call him good who does not do violence to himself, but they also
call the heroes of self-mastery good;People call the absolute friend of truth good-, but they also call him
good who is pious and a transfigurer of things;People call him good who can obey his own voice, but they also call the
devout man good;People call the noble and the haughty man good, but also him who does
not despise and who does not assume condescending airs.People call him good who is kindhearted and who steps out of the way of
broils, but he who thirsts for fight and triumph is also called good;People call him good who always wishes to be first, but they also call
him good who does not wish to be ahead of anybody in anything.2We possess a powerful store of moralfeelings,but we have no goal
for them all. They mutually contradict each other: they have their
origin in different tables of values.There is a wonderful amount of moral power, but there is no longer any
goal towards which all this power can be directed.3All goals have been annihilated, mankind must give themselves a fresh
goal. It is an error to suppose that they had one: they gave themselves
all the goals they ever had. But the prerequisites of all previous
goals have been annihilated.Science traces the course of things but points to no goal: what it does
give consists of the fundamental facts upon which the new goal must be
based.4The profound sterility of the nineteenth century. I have not
encountered a single man who really had a new ideal to bring
forward. The character of German music kept me hoping longest, but
in vain. A stronger type in which all our powers are synthetically
correlated—this constitutes my faith.Apparently everything is decadence. We should so direct this movement
of decline that it may provide the strongest with a new form of
existence.5The dissolution of morality, in its practical consequences, leads
to the atomistic individual, andfurther to the subdivision of the
individual into a quantity of parts—absolute liquefaction.That is why a goal is now more than ever necessary; and love, but a new
love.6I say: “As long as your morality hung over me I breathed like one
asphyxiated. That is why I throttled this snake. I wished to live,
consequently it had to die.”7As long as people are stillforced toact, that is to say as long as
commands are given, synthesis (the suppression of the moral man) will
not be realised To be unable to be otherwise: instincts and commanding
reason extending beyond any immediate object: the ability to enjoy
one’s own nature in action.8None of them wish to bear the burden of the commander; but they will
perform the most strenuous task if only thou commandest them.9We must overcome the past in ourselves: we must combine the instincts
afresh and direct the whole together to one goal:—an extremely
difficult undertaking! It is not only the evil instincts which have to
be overcome,—the so-called good instincts must be conquered also and
consecrated anew!10No leaps must be made in virtue! But everyone must be given a different
path! Not leading to thehighest development of each! Yet everyone may
be a bridge and an example for others.11To help, to pity, to submit and to renounce personal attacks with a
good will,—these things may make even insignificant and superficial
men tolerable to the eye: such men must not be contradicted in their
belief that this good will is “virtue in itself.”12Man makes a deed valuable: but how might a deed make man valuable?13Morality is the concern of those who cannot free themselves from
it: for such people morality therefore belongs to the conditions of
existence. It is impossible to refute conditions of existence: the only
thing one can do is not to have them.14If it were true that life did not deserve to be welcomed, the moral
man, precisely on account of his self-denial and obligingness, would
then be guilty of misusing his fellow to his own personal advantage.15“Love thy neighbour”—this would mean first and foremost: “Let thy
neighbour go his own way”—and it is precisely this kind of virtue that
is the most difficult!16The bad man as the parasite. We must not be merely feasters and
gourmets of life: this is ignoble.17It is a noble sense which forbids our being only feasters and gourmets
of life—this sense revolts against hedonism—: we want to perform
something in return!—But the fundamental feeling of the masses is that
one must live for nothing,—that is their vulgarity.18The converse valuations hold good for the lower among men: in their
case therefore it is necessary to implant virtues. They must be
elevated above their lives, by means of absolute commands and terrible
taskmasters.19What is required: the new law must be made practicable—and out of its
fulfilment, the overcoming of this law, and higher law, must evolve
Zarathustra defines the attitude towards law, inasmuch as he suppresses
the law of laws which is morality.Laws as the backbone They must be worked at and created, by being
fulfilled. The slavish attitude which has reigned hitherto towards law!20The self-overcoming of Zarathustra as the prototype of mankind’s
self-overcoming for the benefit of Superman. To this end the overcoming
of morality is necessary.21The type of the lawgiver, his development and his suffering. What is
the purpose of giving laws at all?Zarathustra is the herald who calls forth many lawgivers.22Individual instruments.1. The Commanders, the mighty—who do not love, unless it be that they
love the images according to which they create. The rich in vitality,
the versatile, the free, who overcome that which is extant2. The obedient, the “emancipated”—love and reverence constitute their
happiness, they have a sense of what is higher (their deficiencies are
made whole by the sight of the lofty).3. The slaves, the order of “henchmen”—: they must be made
comfortable, they must cultivate pity for one another.23The giver, the creator, the teacher—these are preludes of the ruler.24All virtue and all self-mastery has only one purpose: that of preparing
for the rule!25Every sacrifice that the ruler makes is rewarded a hundredfold.26How much does not the warrior, the prince, theman who is responsible
for himself, sacrifice!—this should be highly honoured.27The terrible task of the ruler who educates himself:—the kind of man
and people over which he will rule must be forecast in him: it is in
himself therefore that he must first have become a ruler!28The great educator like nature must elevate obstacles in order that
these may be overcome.29The new teachers as preparatory stages for the highest Architect (they
must impose their type on things).30Institutions may be regarded as the after effects of great individuals
and the means of giving great individuals root and soil—until the
fruit ultimately appears.31As a matter of fact mankind is continually trying to be able to
dispense with great individuals by means of corporations, &c. But they
are utterly dependent upon such great individuals for their ideal.32The eudæmonistic and social ideals lead men backwards,—it may be that
they aim at a very useful working class,—they are creating the ideal
slaveof the future, the lower caste which must on no account be
lacking!33Equal rights for all!—this is the most extraordinary form of
injustice, for with it the highest men do not get their due.34It is not a matter of the rights of the stronger, for strong and weak
are alike in this, that they all extend their power as far as they can.35A new form of estimating man: above all the question:How much power has he got?How manifold are his instincts?How great is his capacity for communication and assimilation?The ruler as the highest type.36Zarathustra rejoices that the war of the classes is at last over,
and that now at length the time is ripe for an order of rank among
individuals. His hatred of the democratic system of levelling is only
a blind; as a matter of fact he is very pleased that this has gone so
far. Now he can perform his task.—Hitherto his doctrines had been directed only at the ruling caste of
the future. These lords of the earth must now take the place of God,
and must create for themselves the profound and absolute confidence
of those they rule. Their new holiness, theirrenunciation of
happiness and ease, must be their first principle. To the lowest they
grant the heirloom of happiness, not to themselves. They deliver the
physiologically botched by teaching them the doctrine of “swift death.”
They offer religions and philosophical systems to each according to his
rank.37“The conflict in the heart of the ruler is the contest between the love
which is in his heart for him who is most remote, and the love which he
feels for his neighbour.”To be a creator and to be capable of goodness are not at all things
which exclude one another. They are rather one and the same thing; but
the creator is farsighted and the good man nearsighted.38The feeling of power. The strife of all egos to discover that thought
which will remain poised above men like a star.—The ego is aprimum
mobile.39The struggle for the application of the power which mankind now
represents! Zarathustra calls to the gladiators of this struggle.40We must make our ideals prevail:—We must strive for power in such a
way as our ideal commands.41The doctrine of the Eternal Recurrence is the turning point of history.42Suddenly the terrible chamber of truth is opened, an unconscious
self-protectiveness, caution, ambush, defence keeps us from the gravest
knowledge. Thus have I lived heretofore. I suppress something; but the
restless babbling and rolling down of stones has rendered my instinct
over-powerful. Now I am rolling my last stone, the most appalling truth
stands close to my hand.Truth has been exorcised out of its grave:—we created it, we waked it:
the highest expression of courage and of the feeling of power. Scorn of
all pessimism that has existed hitherto!We fight with it,—we find out that our only means of enduring it is
to create a creature who is able to endure it:—unless, of course, we
voluntarily dazzle ourselves afresh and blind ourselves in regard to it
But this we are no longer able to do!We it was who created the gravest thought,—let us now create a being
unto whom it will be not only light but blessed.In order to be able to create we must allow ourselves greater freedom
than has ever been vouch-safed us before; to this end we must be
emancipated from morality, and we must be relieved by means of feasts
(Premonitions of the future! We must celebrate the future and no longer
the past! We must compose the myth poetry of the future! We must live
in hopes!) Blessed moments I And then we must once again pull down the
curtain and turn our thoughts to the next unswerving purpose.43Mankind must set its goal above itself—not in a false world, however,
but in one which would be a continuation of humanity.44The half-way house is always present when the will to the future
arises: the greatest event stands immediately before it.45Our very essence is to create a being higher than ourselves. We must
create beyond ourselves. That is the instinct of procreation, that is
the instinct of action and of work.—Just as all willing presupposes a
purpose, so does mankind presuppose a creature which is not yet formed
but which provides the aim of life. This is the freedom of all will.
Love, reverence, yearning for perfection, longing, all these things are
inherent in a purpose.46My desire: to bring forth creatures which stand sublimely above the
whole species man: and to sacrifice “one’s neighbours” and oneself to
this end.The morality which has existed hitherto was limited within the confines
of the species: all moralities that have existed hitherto have been
useful in the first place in order to give unconditional stability to
this species: once this has been achieved the aim can be elevated.One movement is absolute; it is nothing more than the levelling down of
mankind, great ant-organisations, &c.The other movement, my movement, is conversely the accentuation of all
contrasts and gulfs, and the elimination of equality, together with the
creation of supremely powerful creatures.The first movement brings forth the last man, my movement brings forth
the Superman. It is by no means the goal to regard the latter as the
master of the first: two races ought to exist side by side,—separated
as far asunder as possible; the one, like the Epicurean gods, not
concerning themselves in the least with the others.47The opposite of the Superman is the last man: I created him
simultaneously with the former.48The more an individual is free and firm, the more exacting becomes his
love: at last he yearns for Superman, because nothing else is able to
appease his love,49Half-way round the course Superman arises.50Among men I was frightened: among men I desired a host of things and
nothing satisfied me. It was then that I went into solitude and created
Superman. And when I had created him I draped him in the great veil of
Becoming and let the light of midday shine upon him.51“We wish to create a Being,” we all wish to have a hand in it, to love
it. We all want to be pregnant—and to honour and respect ourselves on
that account.We must have a goal in view of which we may all love each other! All
other goals are only fit for the scrap heap.52The strongest in body and soul are the best—Zarathustra’s fundamental
proposition—; from them is generated that higher morality of the
creator. Man must be regenerated after his own image: this is what he
wants, this is his honesty.53Genius to Zarathustra seems like the incarnation of his thought.54Loneliness for a certain time is necessary in order that a creature
may become completely permeated with his own soul—cured and hard. A
new form of community would be one in which we should assert ourselves
martially. Otherwise the spirit becomes tame. No Epicurean “gardens”
and mere “retirement from the masses.” War (but without powder) between
different thoughts and the hosts who support them IA new nobility, the result of breeding. Feasts celebrating the
foundation of families.The day divided up afresh; bodily exercise for all ages. Ἀγών
as a principle.The love of the sexes as a contest around the principle in becoming and
coming.—Ruling will be taught and practised, its hardness as well as
its mildness. As soon as one faculty is acquired in a masterly manner
another one must be striven after.We must let ourselves be taught by the evil, and allow them an
opportunity of a contest. We must make use of the degenerate—The right
of punishment will consist in this, that the offender may be used as
an experimental subject (in dietetics): this is the consecration of
punishment, that one man be used for the highest needs of a future
being.We protect our new community because it is the bridge to our ideal of
the future And for it we work and let others work.55The measure and mean must be found in striving to attain to something
beyond mankind: the highest and strongest kind of man must be
discovered! The highest tendency must be represented continually
in small things:—perfection, maturity, rosy-cheeked health, mild
discharges of power. Just as an artist works, must we apply ourselves
to our daily task and bring ourselves to perfection in everything we
do. We must be honest in acknowledging our real motives to ourselves,
as is becoming in the mighty man.56No impatience! Superman is our next stage and to this end, to this
limit, moderation and manliness are necessary.Mankind must surpass itself, as the Greeks did—and no fleshless
fantasies must be indulged. The higher mind which is associated with a
sickly and nervous character must be suppressed. The goal: the higher
culture of the whole body and not only of the brain.57“Man is something that must be surpassed”:—it is a matter of tempo:
the Greeks were wonderful, there was no haste about them.—My
predecessors: Heraclitus, Empedocles, Spinoza, Goethe.581. Dissatisfaction with ourselves. An antidote to repentance.
The transformation of temperament (e.g.,by means of inorganic
substances). Good will to this dissatisfaction. We should wait for our
thirst and let it become great in order to discover its source.2. Death must be transformed into a means of victory and triumph.3. The attitude towards disease. Freedom where death is concerned.4. The love of the sexes is a means to an ideal (it is the striving of
a being to perish through his opposite). The love for a suffering deity.5. Procreation is the holiest of all things. Pregnancy, the creation of
a woman and a man, who wish to enjoy their unity, and erect a monument
to it by means of a child.6. Pity as a danger. Circumstances must be created which enable
everyone to be able to helphimself, and which leave him to choose
whether he would be helped.7. Education must be directed at making men evil, at developing their
inner devil.8. Inner war as “development”9. “The maintenance of the species,” and the thought of eternal
recurrence.59Principal doctrine. We must strive to make every stage one of
perfection, and rejoice therein,—we must make no leaps!In the first place, the promulgation of laws. After the Superman the
doctrine of eternal recurrence will strike us with horror: Now it is
endurable.60Life itself created this thought which is the most oppressive for life.
Life wishes to get beyond its greatest obstacle IWe must desire to perish in order to arise afresh,—from one day to
the other. Wander through a hundred souls,—let that be thy life and
thy fate! And then finally: desire to go through the whole process once
more!61The highest thing of all would be for us to be able to endure our
immortality.62The moment in which I begot recurrence is immortal, for the sake of
that moment alone I will endure recurrence.63The teaching of eternal recurrence—it is at first oppressive to the
more noble souls and apparently a means of weeding them out,—then the
inferior and less sensitive natures would remain over! “This doctrine
must be suppressed and Zarathustra killed.”64The hesitation of the disciples. “We are already able to bear with this
doctrine, but we should destroy the many by means of it!”Zarathustra laughs: “Ye shall be the hammer: I laid this hammer in your
hands.”65I do not speak to you as I speak to the people. The highest thing for
them would be to despise and to annihilate themselves: the next highest
thing would be for them to despise and annihilate each other.66“My will to do good compels me to remain silent. But my will to the
Superman bids me speak and sacrifice even my friends.”“I would fain form and transform you, how could I endure things
otherwise!”67The history of higher man. The rearing of the better man is
incalculably more painful. The ideal of the necessary sacrifice which
it involves, as in the case of Zarathustra, should be demonstrated: A
man should leave his home, his family and his nativeland. Live under
the scorn of the prevailing morality. The anguish of experiments and
errors. The solution of all the joys offered by the older ideals (they
are now felt to be partly hostile and partly strange).68What is it which gives a meaning, a value, an importance to things?
It is the creative heart which yearns and which created out of this
yearning. It created joy and woe. It wanted to sate itself also with
woe. Every kind of pain that man or beast has suffered, we must take
upon ourselves and bless, and have a goal whereby such suffering would
acquire some meaning.69Principal doctrine: the transfiguration of pain into a blessing, and of
poison into food, lies in our power. The will to suffering.70Concerning heroic greatness as the only state of pioneers. (A yearning
for utter ruin as a means of enduring one’s existence.)We must not desire one state only; we must rather desire to be
periodical creatures—like existence.Absolute indifference to other people’s opinions (because we know their
weights and measures), but their opinions of themselves should be the
subject of pity.71Disciples must unite three qualities in themselves: they must be
true, they must be able and willing tobe communicative, they must
have profound insight into each other.72All kinds of higher men and their oppression and blighting (as a case
in point, Duhring, who was ruined by isolation)—on the whole, this
is the fate of higher men to-day, they seem to be a species that is
condemned to die out: this fact seems to come to Zarathustra’s ears
like a great cry for help. All kinds of insane degenerations of higher
natures seem to approach him (nihilism for instance).73Higher Men who come to Zarathustra in Despair.Temptations to return prematurely to the world—thanks to the
provocation of one’s sympathies.1. The rolling stone, the homeless one, the wanderer:—he who has
unlearned the love of his people because he has learned to love many
peoples,—the good European.2. The gloomy, ambitious son of the people, shy, lonely, and ready for
anything,—who chooses rather to be alone than to be a destroyer,—he
offers himself as an instrument.3. The ugliest man, who is obliged to adorn himself (historical sense)
and who is always in search of a new garment: he desires to make his
appearance becoming, and finally retires into solitude in order not to
be seen, he is ashamed of himself.4. He who honours facts (“the brain of a leech”), the most subtle
intellectual conscience, and because he has it in excess, a guilty
conscience,—he wants to get rid of himself.5. The poet, who at bottom thirsts, for savage freedom,—he chooses
loneliness and the severity of knowledge.6. The discoverer of new intoxicants,—the musician, the sorcerer, who
finally drops on his knees before a loving heart and says: “Not to me
do I wish to lead you but yonder to him.”Those who are sober to excess and who have a yearning for intoxication
which they do not gratify. The Supersobersides.7. Genius (as an attack of insanity), becoming frozen through lack of
love: “I am neither a genius nor a god.” Great tenderness: “people must
show him more love!”8. The rich man who has given everything away and who asks everybody:
“Have you anything you do not want? give me some of it!” as a beggar.9. The Kings who renounce dominion: “we seek him who is more worthy
to rule”—against “equality”: the great man is lacking, consequently
reverence is lacking too.10. The actor of happiness.11. The pessimistic soothsayer who detects fatigue everywhere.12. The fool of the big city.13. The youth from the mount14. The woman (seeks the man).15. The envious emaciated toiler andarriviste.16. The good,                     } and their mad fancy:17. The pious,                    }“For God” that18. The self-centred and    } means “For me.”and saints,74“I gave you the most weighty thought: maybe mankind will perish through
it, perhaps also mankind will be elevated through it inasmuch as by
its means the elements which are hostile to life will be overcome and
eliminated.” “Ye must not chide Life, but yourselves!”—The destiny
of higher man is to be a creator. The organisation of higher men, the
education of the future ruler. “YE must rejoice in your superior power
when ye rule and when ye form anew.” “Not only man but Superman will
recur eternally!”