75The typical suffering of the reformer and also his consolations. The
seven solitudes.He lives as though he were beyond all ages: his loftiness allows him to
have intercourse with the anchorites and the misunderstood of every age.Only his beauty is his defence. He lays his hands on the next thousand
years.His love increases as he sees the impossibility of avoiding the
affliction of pain with it.76Zarathustra’s mood is not one of mad impatience for Superman! It is
peaceful, it can wait: but all action has derived some purpose from
being the road and means thither,—and must be done well and perfectly.The repose of the great stream! Consecration of the smallest thing.
All unrest, and violent longing, all loathing should be presented in
the third partand be overcome! The gentleness, and mildness, &c., in
the first and second parts are both signs of a power which is not yet
self-reliant!With the recovery of Zarathustra, Cæsar stands there inexorable
and kind:—the gulf separating creation, goodness, and wisdom is
annihilated.Clearness, peace, no exaggerated craving, happiness in the moment which
is properly occupied and immortalised!77Zarathustra, Part III.: “I myself am happy.”—When he had taken leave
of mankind he returned unto himself. Like a cloud it vanishes from him.
The manner in which Superman must live: like an Epicurean God.Divine suffering is the substance of the third part of Zarathustra. The
human state of the legislator is only brought forward as an example.His intense love for his friends seems to him a disease,—once more he
becomes peaceful.When the invitations come he gently evades them.78In the fourth part it is necessary to say precisely why it is that the
time of the great noon has come: It is really a description of the age
given by means of visits, but interpreted by Zarathustra.In the fourth part it is necessary to say precisely why “a chosen
people” has first to be created:—they are the lucky cases of nature
as opposed to the unlucky (exemplified by the visitors): only to them
—the lucky cases—is Zarathustra able to express himself concerning
ultimate problems, them aloneis he able to inspire with activity on
behalf of this theory. They are strong, healthy, hard and above all
noble enough for him to give them the hammer with which to remould the
whole world.79The unity in power of the creator, the lover and the knight of
knowledge.80Love alone shall judge—(the creative love which forgets itself in its
work).81Zarathustra can only dispense happiness once the order of rank is
established. Therefore this doctrine must be taught first.The order of rank develops into a system of earthly dominion: the lords
of the earth come last, a new ruling caste. Here and there there arises
from them a perfectly Epicurean God, a Superman, a transfigurer of
existence.The Superhuman’s notion of the world. Dionysus. Returning from these
most strange of all pursuits Zarathustra comes back with love to the
narrowest and smallest things,—he blesses all his experiences and dies
with a blessing on his lips.82From people who merely pray we must become people who bless.